URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WAIRComm/2016/953.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:04:59
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Civil Service Association of Western Australia Incorporated -v- North Metropolitan Health Service Established as a Health Service Provider pursuant to section 32 of the Health Services Act 2016 (WA) [2016] WAIRComm 953 (21 December 2016)
WA HEALTH DENTAL TECHNICIANS (DENTAL HEALTH SERVICES) AWARD
WESTERN AUSTRALIAN INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COMMISSION
CIVIL SERVICE ASSOCIATION OF WESTERN
AUSTRALIA INCORPORATED
NORTH METROPOLITAN HEALTH SERVICE ESTABLISHED AS A
HEALTH SERVICE PROVIDER PURSUANT TO SECTION 32 OF THE HEALTH SERVICES ACT 2016
SERVICE ARBITRATOR
COMMISSIONER T EMMANUEL
WEDNESDAY, 21
DECEMBER 2016
PSAA 1 OF 2016
CITATION NO.
WAIRC 00953
Award issued
Representation
Ms J Moore (of counsel)
Ms R Sinton (as agent)
HAVING heard Ms J Moore (of counsel)
on behalf of the applicant and Ms R Sinton (as agent) on behalf of the
respondent, the Public
Service Arbitrator, pursuant to the powers conferred on
her under the
Industrial Relations Act 1979
(WA), hereby orders –
THAT the WA Health Dental Technicians (Dental Health Services) Award
2016 be made in accordance with the following schedule and that
such award shall
have effect on and from the date of this order.
Commissioner T Emmanuel
SERVICE ARBITRATOR
WA Health Dental Technicians (Dental Health
Services) Award 2016
This Award shall be known as the WA Health Dental Technicians (Dental Health
Services) Award 2016 and shall supersede and replace
the Hospital
Employees’ (Perth Dental Hospital) Award 1971.
1B. - MINIMUM ADULT AWARD WAGE
(1) No employee aged 21 or more shall be paid less than the minimum adult
award wage unless otherwise provided by this clause.
(2) The minimum adult award wage for full-time employees aged 21 or more is
$692.90 per week payable on and from the commencement
of the first pay period on
or after 1 July 2016.
(3) The minimum adult award wage is deemed to include all State Wage order
adjustments from State Wage Case Decisions.
(4) Unless otherwise provided in this clause adults employed as casuals,
part-time employees or piece workers or employees who are
remunerated wholly on
the basis of payment by result shall not be paid less than pro rata the minimum
adult award wage according
to the hours worked.
(5) Employees under the age of 21 shall be paid no less than the wage
determined by applying the percentage prescribed in the junior
rates provision
in this award to the minimum adult award wage.
(6) The minimum adult award wage shall not apply to apprentices, employees
engaged on traineeships or Jobskill placements or employed
Commonwealth Government Supported Wage System or to other categories of
employees who by prescription are paid less than
the minimum award rate,
provided that no employee shall be paid less than any applicable minimum rate of
pay prescribed by the
Minimum Conditions of Employment Act 1993
(7) Liberty to apply is reserved in relation to any special category of
employees not included here or otherwise in relation to the
application of the
minimum adult award wage.
(8) Subject to this clause the minimum adult award wage shall –
(a) Apply to all work in ordinary hours.
(b) Apply to the calculation of overtime and all other penalty rates,
superannuation, payments during any period of paid leave and
for all purposes of
this award.
(9) Minimum Adult Award Wage
The rates of pay in this award include the minimum weekly wage for employees
aged 21 or more payable under the 2015 State Wage order
decision. Any increase
arising from the insertion of the minimum wage will be offset against any
equivalent amount in rates of pay
received by employees whose wages and
conditions of employment are regulated by this award which are above the wage
rates prescribed
in the award. Such above award payments include wages payable
pursuant to enterprise agreements, consent awards or award variations
effect to enterprise agreements and over award arrangements. Absorption which
is contrary to the terms of an agreement is
not required.
Increases under previous State Wage Case Principles or under the current
Statement of Principles, excepting those resulting from enterprise
agreements,
are not to be used to offset the minimum wage.
(10) Adult Apprentices
(a) Notwithstanding the provisions of this clause, an apprentice, 21 years of
age or more, shall not be paid less than $593.90 per
week on and from the
commencement of the first pay period on or after 1 July 2016.
(b) The rate paid in the paragraph above to an apprentice 21 years of age or
more is payable on superannuation and during any period
of paid leave prescribed
by this award.
(c) Where in this award an additional rate is expressed as a percentage,
fraction or multiple of the ordinary rate of pay, it shall
be calculated upon
the rate prescribed in this award for the actual year of apprenticeship.
(d) Nothing in this clause shall operate to reduce the rate of pay fixed by
the award for an adult apprentice in force immediately
prior to 5 June 2003.
2. - ARRANGEMENT
1B. Minimum
Adult Award Wage
Arrangement
of Operation
Definitions
Certificate
Leave - 44/52 Salary Arrangement
Leave - Deferred Salary Arrangement
Packaging Arrangement
Apprentices
Duties Allowance
Work Allowance
Service Leave
Without Pay
Bereavement
Cultural/Ceremonial
Blood/Plasma
Donors Leave
Service Leave
Facilities For Union Representatives
to Attend Association Business
Union Training Leave
Force Reserves Leave
and Jury Service
Disturbance
Vehicle Allowance
Clothing Allowance
Absence from Residence
Preservation
of and Access to Employment Records
Notification
of Entry and Inspection by Authorised Representatives
to Information and Resources
Establishment
of Consultative Mechanisms
Settlement Procedure
Schedule A Respondent Employer
Schedule C Motor Vehicle Allowance
Schedule D Clause 21. –
Overtime Allowance
Schedule E Travelling, Transfer and Relieving
Schedule F Shift Work Allowance
Schedule G Named Union Party
3. - AREA OF OPERATION
This Award shall apply throughout the State of Western Australia.
This Award shall apply to Dental Technicians who are members of or eligible
to be members of the Civil Service Association of Western
Incorporated, employed by the Employer in the classifications prescribed in
“Schedule B – Wages” within
Dental Health Services (an
administrative entity of the Employer as at the date of
registration).
5. - TERM OF AWARD
This Award has effect on and from the date of registration until such time as
it is cancelled or replaced.
6. - DEFINITIONS
“Apprentice” means an apprentice under the
Education and Training Act 1996
(WA) as amended from time to time.
"Board of Reference" means a Board of Reference established under the
provisions of Section 48 of the
Industrial Relations Act 1979
"Casual employee" means an employee engaged by the hour for a period
not exceeding one calendar month in any period of engagement,
or any employee
employed as a casual on an hourly rate of pay by agreement between the
Association and the employer.
“De facto partner" means a
relationship (other than a legal marriage) between two persons of either
different sexes or the same
sex, who live together in a marriage-like
relationship, as provided for by the
Interpretation Act 1984
amended from time to time.
“Dental Technician” means a person
employed within the government health industry who is involved in the
construction
of dentures, crowns, bridges, orthodontic appliances, cast metal
frameworks and other dental appliances. A dental technician also
repairs and
modifies these appliances and possesses an approved qualification in Dental
Technology to Level 5 within the Australian Qualification Framework (the
Diploma of Dental Technology or equivalent).
“Dental Technician
Advanced Level 1” means a Dental Technician (as defined);
(i) who has satisfied all the requirements as a Dental Technician Level 4, or
who has had equivalent training according to the employer;
(ii) who is engaged in all aspects of crown and bridge work, or cast metal
dentures, or orthodontics or advanced complete and partial
denture construction;
(iii) who has satisfied the employer by a practical trade test that he/she
possesses a particular skill in which he/she seeks advancement.
“Dental Technician Advanced Level 2” means a Dental
Technician (as defined); who in addition to meeting the requirements
Dental Technician Advanced Level 1, has satisfied the employer by a theoretical
trade test that he/she possesses a particular
skill in which he/she seeks
advancement.
"Employer" means the North Metropolitan Health Service.
term employee" means an employee who is employed on a full time or part-time
basis on a contract of service of specified duration.
“Fortnightly
wage rate” means the authorised weekly wage rate multiplied by
"Headquarters" means the place in which the principal work of an
employee is carried out, as defined by the employer.
"Metropolitan area"
means that area within a radius of 50 kilometres from the Perth city railway
"One working day" shall equate to seven hours and thirty six
"Partner" means a person who is either a spouse or de facto
"Part-time employment" means regular and continuing employment
of less than 38 hours per week.
"Spouse" means a person who is lawfully
married to that person.
“Trade Test” shall mean a test set by
Dental Health Services, comprising of practical and/or theoretical
components.
“The Association” means the Civil Service
Association of Western Australia Incorporated.
“Union” means
the Civil Service Association of Western Australia
Incorporated.
“WAIRC” means the Western Australian Industrial
Relations Commission.
7. - CERTIFICATE OF SERVICE
On request, the employer shall issue a Certificate of Service containing full
information as to the period of service, and nature
of duties performed by the
employee to the employee on redundancy, retirement, resignation or where
contracts of service expire through
the effluxion of time.
8. - CONTRACT OF SERVICE
(1) (a) Every employee appointed to the employ of an employer shall be on
probation for a period not exceeding six months, unless
otherwise determined by
the employer.
However, employees appointed from the Public Sector who have at least six
months' continuous satisfactory service immediately prior
to their permanent
appointment will not be required to serve a probationary period.
(b) At any time during the period of probation the employer may annul the
appointment and terminate the services of the employee by
the giving of one
week's notice by either party or payment in lieu thereof, by either party.
(c) As soon as possible following the expiry of the period of probation the
employer shall:
(i) confirm the appointment; or
(ii) extend the period of probation for up to six months;
(iii) allow the probationary employment to lapse.
(d) Where the employer extends the period of probationary employment the
contract of employment may be terminated as set out in paragraph
(b) of this
(e) The employer may summarily dismiss an employee deemed guilty of gross
misconduct or neglect of duty and the employee shall not
be entitled to any
notice or payment in lieu of notice.
(2) (a) No employee shall leave the employ of an employer until the
expiration of one month's written notice of the employee's intention
without the approval of the employer. An employee who fails to give the
required notice shall forfeit a sum of $500.00.
Such monies may be withheld
from monies due on termination.
(b) One month's written notice shall be given by the employer to an employee
whose services are no longer required. Provided that
the employer may pay the
employee one month's wage in lieu of the said notice.
(c) Notwithstanding any of the other provisions contained in this clause a
lesser period of notice may be negotiated between the employer
(d) The employer may summarily dismiss an employee deemed guilty of gross
misconduct or neglect of duty and the employee shall not
be entitled to any
notice or payment in lieu of notice.
(e) An employee having attained the age of 55 years shall be entitled to
retire from the employ of the employer.
(3) (a) A part-time employee shall be entitled to the same wage, leave and
other conditions prescribed in this award for full-time
employees, with payment
for paid leave being in the proportion to which the employee's weekly hours bear
to the weekly hours of an
employee engaged full time in that class of work.
(b) The provisions of subclause (2) of this clause shall also apply in
respect to part time employees.
(4) (a) Notwithstanding the other provisions contained in this clause an
employer may employ employees for a fixed term.
(b) Employees appointed for a fixed term shall be advised in writing of the
terms of the appointment and such advice shall specify
the dates of commencement
and termination of employment.
(c) The provisions of paragraphs (a), (b), (c) and (d) of subclause (2) of
this clause shall also apply in respect to fixed term employees.
9. - PART-TIME EMPLOYMENT
(1) (a) Each permanent part-time arrangement shall be confirmed by the
employer in writing and should include the following specifications:
(i) the agreed period of the arrangement; and
(ii) the hours to be worked daily and weekly by the employee , including
starting and finishing times, which shall hereinafter be
referred to as
"ordinary working hours".
(b) The employer shall give an employee one (1) months’ notice of any
proposed variation to that employee's ordinary working
hours, provided that the
employer shall not vary the employee's total weekly hours of duty without the
employee's prior written consent,
a copy of which shall be forwarded to the
Association.
(c) Notwithstanding paragraph (b) of this subclause whenever agreement in
writing is reached for a temporary variation to an employee's
ordinary working
(i) Time worked up to 7 hours and thirty six minutes on any day is not to be
regarded as overtime but an extension of the contract
hours for that day and
should be paid at the normal rate of pay.
(ii) Additional days worked, up to a total of five days per week, are also
regarded as an extension of the contract and should be
paid at the normal rate
(2) The provisions of Clause 21. - Overtime of this Award shall apply to all
time worked outside the ordinary working hours prescribed
by paragraph (a) (ii)
of subclause (1) of this clause unless an arrangement pursuant to paragraph (c)
of subclause (1) of this clause
is in place.
(3) Nothing in this clause prevents the employer and the employee agreeing to
other such arrangements as is approved by the employer,
in accordance with
subclause (4) of Clause 19. - Hours of this Award.
(4) (a) An employee who is employed on a part-time basis shall be paid a
proportion of the appropriate full-time wage dependent upon
time worked. The
wage shall be calculated in accordance with the following formula:
Hours Worked per Fortnight
Full-time Fortnightly Wage
(b) An employee shall be entitled to annual increments as prescribed in
Clause 17. - Annual Increments of this Award.
(5) Employees are entitled to the holidays prescribed in Clause 23. - Public
Holidays of this Award without variation of the employee's
fortnightly wage
provided the holidays occur on a day which is normally worked.
(6) (a) An employee shall be granted leave in accordance with Clause 22. -
Annual Leave of this Award. Payment to an employee proceeding
on annual leave
shall be calculated having regard for any variations to the employee's ordinary
working hours during the accrual
period. Payment in such instances shall be
calculated as follows:
(i) Where accrued annual leave only is being taken, the ordinary hours worked
by the employee over the accrual period shall be averaged
to achieve the average
hours worked per fortnight. This average is then applied to the following
formula to achieve an average fortnightly
rate of pay:
Average Fortnightly Hours Worked
Fortnightly Wage
(ii) Subject to paragraph (iv) of this subclause, annual leave taken entirely
in advance shall be paid according to the wage the employee
would have received
had the employee not proceeded on leave.
(iii) Subject to paragraph (iv) of this subclause, annual leave which
combines both accrued and leave taken in advance, shall be calculated
the accrued portion of leave shall be paid at the rate achieved by averaging
the hours worked during the accrual period; and
the portion of leave which is being taken in advance shall be paid according
to the wage the employee would have received had the
employee not proceeded on
(iv) Payment for annual leave taken in advance pursuant to paragraph (ii) and
(iii) of this subclause, shall be subject to financial
reconciliation either at
the end of the calendar year or when the employee ceases employment to take
account of any variations in
the hours worked by the employee subsequent to the
employee proceeding on annual leave. This may require further payment by the
employer to the employee, or repayment by the employee to the employer. In all
instances the reconciliation should be based on the
appropriate fortnightly wage
at the time the leave was taken. An employee taking annual leave in advance
shall be advised of the
requirements of this section prior to the employee
proceeding on such leave.
(7) Credits provided in Clause 25. - Sick Leave of this Award shall accrue to
the employee provided that where an employee is employed
for less than 76 hours
per fortnight, the credits shall be pro rated according to the number of hours
worked each fortnight. Payment
made for sick leave granted in respect of
part-time service shall be calculated in accordance with the formula set out in
(a) of subclause (4) of this clause.
(8) An employee shall proceed on long service leave for 13 weeks after ten
years continuous service. Payment made for long service
leave granted to an
employee in respect of such part-time service shall be adjusted according to the
hours worked by the employee
during that part-time service, subject to the
(a) If an employee consistently worked on a part-time basis for a regular
number of hours during the whole of the employee’s
qualifying service, the
employee shall continue to be paid the wage determined on that basis during the
long service leave.
(b) If an employee has worked a varying number of weekly hours during the
period of qualifying service, the payment for long service
leave granted in
respect of part-time service should be calculated on a wage which bears to the
full-time wage of the position occupied
by the employee when taking leave the
same proportion that the hours worked when employed part-time bears to the
normal weekly hours
of a full-time employee.
(9) Subject to Clauses 37. - Trade Union Training Leave and 38. - Defence
Force Reserves Leave of this Award, part-time employees
shall receive the same
entitlement as full-time employees, but payment shall only be made for those
hours that would normally have
been worked but for the leave.
(10) Subject to Clause 30. - Short Leave of this Award, part-time employees
are eligible for short leave on a pro-rata basis calculated
in accordance with
the following formula:
Hours Worked Per Fortnight
(11) Subject to Clause 29. - Study Assistance of this Award, part-time
employees are entitled to study leave on the same basis as
full-time employees.
(12) Right of Reversion of Employees
(a) Where a full-time employee is permitted to work part-time for a specified
period no greater than 12 months, that employee has
a right, (upon written
application) to revert to full-time hours in that position, or a position of
equal classification, as soon
as is deemed practicable by the employer, but no
later than the expiry of the agreed period.
(b) Where a full-time employee is permitted to work part-time for a period
greater than 12 months that employee may apply to revert
to full-time hours in
the position previously occupied before becoming part-time or a position of
equal classification but only as
soon as deemed practicable by the employer.
This should not prevent the transfer of said employee to another full-time
in a classification commensurable to that of their previous full-time
(13) The number or proportion of part-time Dental Technicians shall not
exceed any number or proportion that may be agreed in writing
between the Civil
Service Association and the employer.
10. - CASUAL EMPLOYMENT
(a) A casual employee shall be paid for each hour worked at the appropriate
classification contained in Clause 11. - Wages of this
Award in accordance with
the following formula:
Fortnightly Wage
With the addition of twenty percent in lieu of annual leave, sick leave, long
service leave and payment for public holidays.
(2) Conditions of Employment
(a) Conditions of employment, leave and allowances provided under the
provisions of this Award shall not apply to a casual employee
with the exception
of bereavement and carer’s leave. However, where expenses are directly
and necessarily incurred by a casual
employee in the ordinary performance of
their duties, he/she shall be entitled to reimbursement in accordance with the
of this Award.
(b) Nothing in this clause shall confer "permanent" or "fixed term contract"
employee status to a casual employee.
(c) The employment of a casual employee may be terminated at any time by the
casual employee or the employer giving to the other,
one hour's prior notice.
In the event of an employer or casual employee failing to give the required
notice, one hour's wage shall
be paid or forfeited.
(d) The provisions of Clause 21. - Overtime Allowance of this Award do not
apply to casual employees who are paid by the hour for
each hour worked.
Additional hours are paid at the normal casual rate.
(e) A casual employee shall be informed that their employment is casual and
that they have no entitlement to paid leave, with the
exception of bereavement
leave before they are engaged.
(3) Caring Responsibilities
(a) Subject to the evidentiary and notice requirements in Clause 26 –
Carers Leave of this Award, a casual employee shall be
entitled to not be
available to attend work or to leave work if they need to care for members of
their immediate family or household
who are sick and require care and support,
or who require care due to an unexpected emergency, or the birth of a child.
(b) The employer and the casual employee shall agree on the period for which
the casual employee will be entitled to not be available
to attend work. In the
absence of agreement, the employee is entitled to not be available to attend
work for up to 48 hours (i.e.
two days) per occasion. The casual employee
is not entitled to any payment for the period of non-attendance.
(c) An employer must not fail to re-engage a casual employee because the
casual employee accessed the entitlements provided for in
this subclause. The
rights of an employer to engage or not engage a casual employee are otherwise
not affected.
11. - WAGES
(1) The weekly base rate of pay applicable to Dental Technicians and
Apprentice Dental Technicians are those contained in Schedule
B –Wages of
this Award.
(2) Payment Of Wages
(a) Wages shall be paid fortnightly but, where the usual pay day falls on a
public holiday, payment shall be made on the previous
working day.
(b) The hourly rate shall be computed as one seventy-sixth of the fortnight's
(c) The hourly rate referred to in paragraph (b) of this subclause shall only
be applied to an average of no more than 38 hours per
week worked as ordinary
hours under this Award.
(d) Wages shall be paid by direct funds transfer to the credit of an account
nominated by the employee at a bank, building society
or credit union approved
by the Under Treasurer or an Accountable Employee.
(e) Provided that where such form of payment is impracticable or where some
exceptional circumstances exist, and by agreement between
the employer and the
Association, payment by cheque may be made.
(3) (a) Apprentice: The weekly rate of wage shall be a percentage of the
tradesperson’s rate as under:
(i) Four Year Term %
employment 42
year of employment 55
3rd year of employment 75
year of employment 88
(ii) Three and a Half Year Term
Next year 55
Next following year 75
Final Year 88
(iii) Three Year Term
year of employment
year of employment 75
year of employment
and thereafter 88
For the purposes of this part, “Tradesperson's Rate” means the
total wage prescribed in Schedule B - Wages for a Dental
Technician Year
(4) Arbitrated Safety Net Adjustments
(a) The rates of pay in this Award include arbitrated safety net adjustments
available since December 1993, under the Arbitrated Safety
Net Adjustment
(b) These arbitrated safety net adjustments may be offset against any
equivalent amount in the rate of pay received by employees since
1 November 1991
above the rate prescribed in the Award, except where such absorption is contrary
to the terms of an industrial agreement.
(c) Increases in rates of pay otherwise made under the State Wage Case
Principles, excepting those resulting from enterprise agreements,
are not to be
used to offset arbitrated safety net adjustments.
(5) Special Allowances
The employer shall not be prohibited from granting special allowances based
on additional duties and responsibilities undertaken by
an employee due to
expertise and knowledge of the employee.
(6) Amalgamation of Wage Classes
In allocating wages or wage ranges the employer may amalgamate any two or
more levels or, allocate specific wage points from a level
or levels prescribed
by this Award.
12. - PURCHASED LEAVE - 44/52 SALARY
ARRANGEMENT
(1) The employer and an employee may agree to enter into an arrangement
whereby the employee can purchase up to eight (8) weeks additional
(2) The employer will assess each application for a 44/52 salary arrangement
on its merits and give consideration to the personal
circumstances of the
employee seeking the arrangement.
(3) Where an employee is applying for purchased leave of between five (5) and
eight (8) weeks the employer will give priority access
to those employees with
carer responsibilities.
(4) Access to this entitlement will be subject to the employee having
satisfied the agency’s accrued leave management policy.
(5) The employee can agree to take a reduced wage spread over the 52 weeks of
the year and receive the following amounts of purchased
Number of Weeks’ Salary
Spread Over 52
Number of Weeks’
(6) The purchased leave will not be able to be accrued. The employee is to
be entitled to pay in lieu of the purchased leave not
taken. In the event that
the employee is unable to take such purchased leave, his/her wage will be
adjusted on the last pay period
in January to take account of the fact that time
worked during the year was not included in the wage.
(7) Where an employee who is in receipt of an allowance provided for in
Clause 18. - Higher Duties Allowance of this Award proceeds
on any period of
additional purchased leave the employee shall not be entitled to receive payment
of the allowance for any period
of additional purchased leave. When not on a
period of purchased leave the employee shall receive the full entitlement to
Duties Allowance in accordance with Clause 18 – Higher Duties
Allowance of this Award.
(8) In the event that a part-time employee’s ordinary working hours are
varied during the year, the wage paid for such leave
taken will be adjusted on
the last pay in January to take into account any variations to the
employee’s ordinary working hours
during the previous year.
13. - PURCHASED LEAVE - DEFERRED SALARY
ARRANGEMENT
(1) With the written agreement of the employer, an employee may elect to
receive, over a four-year period, 80% of the wage they would
otherwise be
entitled to receive in accordance with this Award.
(2) The employer will assess each application for deferred salary on its
merits and give consideration to the personal circumstances
of the employee
seeking the leave.
(3) On completion of the fourth year, an employee will be entitled to 12
months leave and will receive an amount equal to 80% of the
wage they were
otherwise entitled to in the fourth year of deferment.
(4) Where an employee completes four (4) years of deferred salary service and
is not required to attend duty in the following year,
the period of
non-attendance shall not constitute a break in service and shall count as
service on a pro-rata basis for all purposes.
(5) An employee may withdraw from this arrangement prior to completing a
four-year period by written notice. The employee will receive
payment of salary forgone to that time but will not be entitled to equivalent
absence from duty.
(6) The employer will ensure that superannuation arrangements and taxation
effects are fully explained to the employee by the relevant
Authority. The
employer will put any necessary arrangements into place.
Variation of the Arrangements
(7) As an alternative to subclause (5) of this clause, and only by mutual
agreement of the employer and the employee, the provisions
of the deferred
arrangement may be varied subject to the following:
(a) the term of the arrangement will not extend beyond that contemplated by
this clause,
(b) the variation will not result in any consequential monetary or related
gain or loss to either the employer or the employee, and
(c) the percentage of salary to apply during the 12 months leave as specified
in subclause 3 of this clause will be calculated as
80% of the average ordinary
prescribed hours worked over the previous four years.
14. - SALARY PACKAGING ARRANGEMENT
(1) An employee may, by agreement with the employer, enter into a salary
packaging arrangement in accordance with this clause and
Australian Taxation
Office requirements.
(2) Salary packaging is an arrangement whereby the entitlements and benefits
under this Award, contributing toward the Total Employment
Cost (TEC), (as
defined in subclause (3) of this clause) of an employee, can be reduced by and
substituted with another or other
(3) The TEC for salary packaging purposes is calculated by adding the
following entitlements and benefits:
(a) the base salary;
(b) other cash allowances;
(c) non cash benefits;
(d) any Fringe Benefit Tax liabilities currently paid; and
(e) any variable components.
(4) Where an employee enters into a salary packaging arrangement the employee
will be required to enter into a separate written agreement
with the employer
setting out the terms and conditions of the salary packaging arrangement.
(5) Notwithstanding any salary packaging arrangement, the salary rate as
specified in this Award, is the basis for calculating wage
related entitlements
specified in the Award.
(6) Compulsory Employer Superannuation Guarantee contributions are to be
calculated in accordance with applicable federal and state
legislation.
Compulsory employer contributions made to superannuation schemes established
State Superannuation Act 2000
(WA) are calculated on the gross
(pre-packaged) salary amount regardless of whether an employee participates in a
salary packaging
arrangement with their employer.
(7) A salary packaging arrangement cannot increase the costs to the employer
of employing an individual.
(8) A salary packaging arrangement is to provide that the amount of any
taxes, penalties or other costs for which the employer or
employee is or may
become liable for and are related to the salary packaging arrangement, shall be
borne in full by the employee.
(9) In the event of any increase in taxes, penalties or costs relating to a
salary packaging arrangement, the employee may vary or
cancel that salary
packaging arrangement.
15. - SUPPORTED WAGE
(1) Employees Eligible for a Supported Wage
This clause defines the conditions that will apply to employees who, because
of the effects of a disability, are eligible for a supported
wage under the
terms of this clause. In the context of this clause, the following definitions
will apply:
"Disability Support Pension" means the Commonwealth pension scheme to provide
income security for persons with a disability as provided
Security Act 1991
, as amended from time to time, or any successor to that
scheme; and
"Assessment Instrument" means the form provided for under the Supported Wage
System that records the assessment of the productive
capacity of the person to
be employed under the Supported Wage System.
(2) Eligibility Criteria
Employees covered by this clause will be those who are unable to perform the
range of duties to the competence level required within
the class of work for
which the employee is engaged under this Award, because of the effects of a
disability on their productive
capacity and who meet the impairment criteria for
receipt of a Disability Support Pension. (This clause does not apply to any
employee who has a claim against the employer, which is subject to the
provisions of workers' compensation legislation, or any provision
of the Award
relating to the rehabilitation of employees who are injured in the course of
their current employment).
(3) Supported Wage Rates
Employees to whom this clause applies shall be paid the applicable percentage
of the minimum rate of pay prescribed by the Award for
the class of work, which
the person is performing according to the following schedule:
Assessed Capacity (clause 16.5)
% of Prescribed Award Rate
(Provided that the minimum amount payable shall be not less than $61 per
*Where a person's assessed capacity is 10%, they shall receive a high degree
of assistance and support.
(4) Assessment of Capacity
For the purpose of establishing the percentage of the Award rate to be paid
to the employees, the productive capacity of the employee
will be assessed in
accordance with the Supported Wage System and documented in an assessment
instrument by either:
(a) the employer and the union, in consultation with the employee, or if
desired by any of these; or
(b) the employer and an accredited Assessor from a panel agreed by the
parties to the Award and the employee.
(5) Lodgement of Assessment Instruments
All assessment instruments under the conditions of this clause, including the
appropriate percentage of the Award wage rate to be
paid to the employee, shall
be lodged by the employer with the Registrar of the Commission.
All assessment instruments shall be agreed and signed by the parties to the
assessment, provided that where the union is not a party
to the assessment, it
shall be referred by the Registrar to the union by certified mail and shall take
effect unless an objection
is notified to the Registrar within 10 working
(6) Review of Assessment
The assessment of the applicable percentage should be subject to annual
review or earlier on the basis of a reasonable request for
such a review. The
process of review shall be in accordance with the procedures for assessing
capacity under the Supported Wage
(7) Other Terms and Conditions of Employment
Where an assessment has been made, the applicable percentage shall apply to
the wage rate only. Employees covered by the provisions
of this clause will be
entitled to the same terms and conditions of employment as all other employees
covered by the Award paid on
a pro rata basis.
(8) Workplace Adjustment
An employer wishing to employ a person under the provisions of this clause
shall take reasonable steps to make changes in the workplace
to enhance the
employee's capacity to do the job. Changes may involve re design of job duties,
working time arrangements and work
organisation in consultation with other
employees in the area.
(9) Trial Period
In order for an adequate assessment of the employee's capacity to be made, an
employer may employ a person under the provisions of
this clause for a trial
period not exceeding 12 weeks, except that in some cases additional work
adjustment time (not exceeding 4
weeks) may be needed.
During the trial period the assessment of capacity shall be undertaken and
the proposed wage rate for a continuing employment relationship
determined.
The minimum amount payable to the employee during the trial period shall be
no less than $61 per week.
Work trials should include induction or training as appropriate to the job
being trialled.
Where the employer and employee wish to establish a continuing employment
relationship following the completion of the trial period,
a further contract of
employment shall be entered into based on the outcome of assessment under
subclause (5) of this clause.
16. - APPRENTICES
(1) Apprenticeships
(a) Apprentices may be taken in the ratio of one apprentice for every two or
fraction of two (the fraction being not less than one)
Dental Technicians and
shall not be taken in excess of that ratio unless –
(i) The Union agrees; or
(ii) The WAIRC so determines.
(b) Where an apprentice has a rostered day off duty as prescribed in
“Clause 19. – Hours” and that day falls within
a period of
block release an alternative rostered day off shall be arranged at a mutually
convenient time.
(c) If, through no fault of their own, an apprentice fails to attend a period
of training in any week, fortnight or year as prescribed
that period shall be
made up as agreed between the apprentice, Employer and training authority.
(d) An apprentice shall be released to attend vocational classes or classes
of instruction in accordance with the
Vocational Education and Training Act
the Vocational Education and Training (General) Regulations
(WA), or the Training Contract as the case requires. Apprentices shall
be paid the ordinary wages they would otherwise have been paid
during the period
they are released from work.
(e) The provisions of this Award shall be read in conjunction with the
Vocational Education and Training Act 1996
the Vocational
Education and Training (General) Regulations 2009
(WA) as amended from time
17. - ANNUAL INCREMENTS
(1) Employees shall proceed to the maximum of their wage range by annual
increments, after 12 months continuous service at each increment
point, unless
there is an adverse report on the employee’s performance or conduct which
recommends the non-payment of an annual
(2) The following process shall apply where a report on an employee’s
performance or conduct recommends the non-payment of an
annual increment:
(a) The employee will be shown the report prior to completing 12 months
continuous service since their last incremental advance.
(b) The employee will be provided with an opportunity to comment in
(c) The employee’s comments will be considered immediately by the
employer and a decision made as to whether to approve the
payment of the
increment or withhold payment for a specific period.
(d) Where the increment is withheld, the employer before the expiry of the
specified period will complete a further report and the
above provisions will
(3) The non-payment of an increment will not change the normal anniversary
date of any further increment payments.
(4) For the purposes of this clause "continuous service", except where an
increment is payable according to age, shall not include:
(a) any period exceeding 14 calendar days during which an employee is absent
on leave without pay. In the case of leave without pay
which exceeds 14
calendar days the entire period of such leave without pay is excised in
(b) any period which exceeds six months in one continuous period during which
an employee is absent on workers' compensation. Provided
that only that portion
of such continuous absence which exceeds six months shall not count as
"continuous service";
(c) any period which exceeds three months in one continuous period during
which an employee is absent on sick leave without pay.
Provided that only that
portion of such continuous absence which exceeds three months shall not count as
"continuous service".
18. - HIGHER DUTIES ALLOWANCE
(1) An employee who is directed by the employer to act in an office which is
classified higher than the employee's own substantive
office and who performs
the full duties and accepts the full responsibility of the higher office for a
continuous period of five
(5) consecutive working days or more, shall, subject
to the provisions of this clause, be paid an allowance equal to the difference
between the employee's own wage and the wage the employee would receive if the
employee was permanently appointed to the office in
which the employee is so
directed to act.
Provided that where the hours of duty of an employee performing shift work
are greater than 7 hours and 36 minutes per day as provided
for in paragraph
(3)(a) of Clause 20 – Shift Work Allowance of this Award the allowance
shall be payable after the completion
of 38 consecutive working hours in the
higher classified position. This period shall not include any time worked as
(2) Where the full duties of a higher office are temporarily performed by two
(2) or more employees they shall each be paid an allowance
as determined by the
(3) An employee who is directed to act in a higher classified office but who
is not required to carry out the full duties of the position
and/or accept the
full responsibilities, shall be paid such proportion of the allowance provided
for in subclause (1) of this clause
as the duties and responsibilities performed
bear to the full duties and responsibilities of the higher office. Provided
employee shall be informed, prior to the commencement of acting in the
higher classified office, of the duties to be carried out,
the responsibilities
to be accepted and the allowance to be paid.
The allowance paid may be adjusted during the period of higher duties.
(4) Where an employee who has qualified for payment of higher duties
allowance under this clause is required to act in another office
offices classified higher than the employee's own for periods less than five
consecutive working days without any break
in acting service, such employee
shall be paid a higher duties allowance for such periods: provided that payment
shall be made at
the highest rate the employee has been paid during the term of
continuous acting or at the rate applicable to the office in which
the employee
is currently acting - whichever is the lesser.
(5) Where an employee is directed to act in an office which has an
incremental range of salaries such an employee shall be entitled
to receive an
increase in the higher duties allowance equivalent to the annual increment the
employee would have received had the
employee been permanently appointed to such
office; provided that acting service with allowances for acting in offices for
classification or higher than the office during the eighteen (18)
months preceding the commencement of such acting shall aggregate
as qualifying
service towards such an increase in the allowance.
(6) Where an employee who is in receipt of an allowance granted under this
clause and has been so for a continuous period of twelve
(12) months or more,
proceeds on -
(a) a period of normal annual leave; or
(b) a period of any other approved leave of absence of not more than four (4)
weeks, the employee shall continue to receive the allowance
for the period of
leave, provided that this subclause shall also apply to an employee who has been
in receipt of an allowance for
less than twelve (12) months if during the
employee's absence no other employee acts in the office in which the employee
immediately prior to proceeding on leave and the employee resumes in
the office immediately on return from leave.
(7) For the purpose of this clause the expression "normal annual leave" shall
mean the annual period of recreation leave as referred
to in Clause 22. - Annual
Leave of this Award and shall include any public holidays and leave in lieu
accrued during the preceding
twelve (12) months taken in conjunction with such
annual leave.
(8) Where employees in receipt of an allowance granted under this clause and
proceeds on:
(a) a period of annual leave in excess of the normal, such employees shall
only receive payment of such allowance for the period of
normal annual leave
(b) a period of any other approved leave of absence of more than four (4)
weeks, such employees shall not be entitled to receive payment
of such allowance
for the whole or any part of the period of such leave.
19. - HOURS
(1) Except as otherwise provided in this clause, the ordinary hours of work
shall be 38 hours per week to be worked as determined
by the employer between
the hours of 7.00 am and 6.00 pm on five days per week Monday to Friday.
(2) (a) Employees shall be entitled to a meal break between 12.00 noon and
2.00 pm which shall not be less than 30 minutes nor greater
than 90 minutes in
duration. An employee shall not be required to work for more than five (5)
hours on any day without taking a
meal break.
(b) In the event of an emergency an employer may defer the taking of a meal
(c) For the purposes of this clause a standard meal break shall be 45 minutes
in duration.
(3) The employer may vary the ordinary hours of attendance observed so as to
make provision for -
(a) the attendance of employees for ordinary duty on a Saturday, Sunday, or
Public Holiday as prescribed in Clause 23. - Public Holidays
of this Award;
(b) the performance of shift work including work on Saturdays, Sundays, and
Public Holidays as prescribed in Clause 20. - Shift Work
Allowance of this
(c) the disposal of public business or the nature of the duties of an
employee or class of employees.
Provided that where the ordinary hours of duty are so varied they shall not
prescribe ordinary working hours in excess of 152 in a
four week period. This
provision is subject to subclause (2)(a) of this clause.
(4) Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph (a) of this subclause, where
it is considered necessary to provide for more economic
operations the employer
may authorise the operation of alternative working arrangements.
Such alternative working arrangements shall be either -
(a) the operation of flexitime as specified in subclause (6) of this clause;
(b) the operation of a nine day fortnight as specified in subclause (7) of
this clause; or
(c) such other arrangement as is considered appropriate by the employer.
(5) (a) Where an employee is required to relieve in another position which is
subject to a different working arrangement the employee
relieving shall observe
the working arrangement applicable to the position in which the relief is being
carried out.
(b) A period of relief to be carried out in a position subject to a nine day
fortnight shall not commence or cease on the substantive
occupant's rostered day
In respect to the provisions contained in subclause (5) of this clause any
period of relief which results in the employee incurring
a debit or credit of
hours outside of 76 hours a fortnight shall be adjusted upon return to the
substantive position subject to consultation
with the employer.
(6) Flexitime Arrangements
(a) In accordance with subclause (4)(a) of this clause employees may select
their own starting and finishing times within the following
7.00 am to 9.30 am
12.00 noon to 2.00 pm
3.30 pm to 6.00 pm
(b) (i) A flexitime roster shall be maintained by the employer who will
indicate the minimum staffing and other requirements in respect
to starting and
finishing times, lunch break coverage and flexileave.
(ii) The flexitime roster shall be made available to all affected employees
no later than three days prior to the settlement period
described in subclause
(6)(h)(i) of this clause.
(iii) The flexitime roster shall be prepared in consultation with the
affected employees, subject to the employer retaining the right
to determine
hours to suit operational needs.
(iv) Subject to four weeks' notice being given, the employer may withdraw the
authorisation of a flexitime roster.
(c) Employees must work in the following periods:
9.30 am to 12.00 noon
2.00 pm to 3.30 pm
For the purposes of this subclause such periods are to be known as core
(d) An employee shall be allowed a meal break between 12.00 noon and 2.00 pm
of not less than 30 minutes but not exceeding 45 minutes
except where approved
by the employer.
(e) Notwithstanding any provisions contained in this subclause an employee
may be allowed a maximum of two full days or any combination
of half days and
full days that does not exceed two days in any one settlement period as
described in subclause (6)(h)(i) of this
(f) Flexileave may be taken before accrual subject to such conditions as the
employer may impose.
(g) Full days of flexileave may not be taken on consecutive working days.
(h) For the purposes of this subclause a settlement period shall -
(i) consist of four weeks;
(ii) commence at the beginning of a pay period;
(iii) have the required hours of duty of 152 hours.
(i) (i) Credit hours a maximum of seven hours 36 minutes shall be allowed at
the end of each settlement period and shall be carried
forward to the next
settlement period.
(ii) In the case of credit hours greater than seven hours 36 minutes gained
in one settlement period, the hours in excess of seven
hours 36 minutes shall be
(iii) Credit hours at any point within the settlement period shall not exceed
(j) (i) Debit hours below the required 152 hours prescribed in paragraph (i)
of this subclause to a maximum of four hours shall be
allowed at the end of each
settlement period and shall be carried forward to the next settlement
(ii) For debit hours in excess of four hours, employees shall be required to
take leave without pay for the period necessary to reduce
debit hours to those
specified in subclause (j)(i) of this clause.
(k) Notwithstanding any of the provisions contained in this subclause,
maximum of ten hours may be worked in any one day.
(l) Where study leave as provided in Clause 29. - Study Assistance of this
Award has been approved credits will be given for education
commitments provided
in that clause and for which leave is necessary to allow for attendance at
formal classes.
(m) (i) Employees receiving at least one day's prior notice of overtime shall
be required to work the prescribed hours of duty determined
by the employee
under subclause (1) of this clause.
(ii) Where an employee is required to work overtime at the conclusion of a
day with less than one day's notice, and
(aa) where the employee has at the commencement of that day two hours or more
flexitime credits, the employee shall be paid overtime
after five hours' work on
that day or for time worked after 3.30 pm, whichever is the later; or
(bb) where that employee has commenced duty prior to 8.30 am and has, at the
commencement of that day, less than two hours' flexitime
credits, the employee
shall be paid overtime, for time worked after the completion of prescribed hours
of duty or after working seven
hours 36 minutes on that day, whichever is the
earlier; or
(cc) where that employee has commenced work after 8.30 am and has, at the
commencement of that day, less than two hours' flexitime
credits, the employee
shall be paid overtime, for time worked after 5.30 pm or after working seven
hours 36 minutes, on that day
whichever is the earlier.
(iii) Where an employee is required to work overtime at the beginning of a
day with less than one day's notice, that employee shall
be paid overtime for
any time worked prior to the commencing time for prescribed hours of duty
determined by the Dental Health Services
under subclause (1) of this clause.
(7) Nine Day Fortnight
(a) In accordance with the provision contained in paragraph (b) of subclause
(4) of this clause, the ordinary hours of duty of 76
hours a fortnight may be
worked over nine days of the fortnight exclusive of work performed on Saturday,
Sunday and the rostered
(b) For the purposes of this subclause the ordinary hours of duty to be
worked shall be eight hours 20 minutes worked between 7.00
am and 6.00 pm, on
five days per week excluding Saturday and Sunday.
(c) Each employee shall be allowed one rostered day off per fortnight.
(d) When a public holiday falls on a rostered day off that employee shall be
granted a day in lieu of the public holiday prior to
the conclusion of the
current fortnight.
(e) In taking annual leave, where a period of leave involves a part day, the
part day shall be availed of at the commencement of the
period of leave.
20. - SHIFT WORK ALLOWANCE
(1) In this Clause the following expressions shall have the following
"Day shift" means a shift commencing after 6.00 am and before 12.00 noon.
"Afternoon shift" means a shift commencing at or after 12.00 noon and before
"Night shift" means a shift commencing at or after 6.00 pm and before 6.01
"Public holiday" shall mean a holiday provided in Clause 23. - Public
Holidays of this Award.
(2) (a) (i) An employee required to work a weekday afternoon or night shift,
will in addition to the ordinary weekly wage rate of
pay, be paid a fixed
loading of $21.93 for each shift so worked.
(ii) For the purposes of clause 20(2)(a)(i), “weekly wage” is the
ordinary weekly wage payable for the position as listed
in Schedule B - Wages.
(b) Work performed during ordinary rostered hours on the following days
shall be paid for at the following rates, in lieu of the
allowance prescribed in
clause 20(2)(a):
(i) Saturdays - time and one-half;
(ii) Sundays - time and three quarters; and
(iii) Public holidays – double time and one half.
Provided that in lieu of the provisions of clause 20(2)(b)(iii) and subject
to agreement between the employer and the employee, work
performed during
ordinary rostered hours on a public holiday shall be paid for at the rate of
time and one-half and the employee
may, in addition be allowed a day’s
leave with pay to be added to annual leave to be taken at some other time within
on one year.
(c) Weekend Penalty Rates for Casual Employees
(i) Notwithstanding the provisions of clause 10(2)(a) – Casual
Employment, casual employees are entitled to weekend shift penalties.
performed during ordinary rostered hours on the following days shall be paid for
at the following rates:
Saturdays and public holidays - time and one-half (casuals are already paid a
loading in lieu of public holidays); and
Sundays - time and three quarters.
(ii) These rates are paid in addition to but not compounded on the casual
loading provided for clause 10(1)(a) – Casual Employment.
(d) An employee rostered off duty on a public holiday shall be paid at
ordinary rates for such day or, subject to agreement between
the employer and
the employee, be allowed a day's leave with pay in lieu of the holiday to be
added to the employee's next annual
leave entitlement or taken at a mutually
convenient time within a period of one year.
(e) An employee engaged on shift work who is rostered to work regularly on
Sundays and/or public holidays shall be entitled to one
week's leave in addition
to the employee's normal entitlement to annual leave of absence for
recreation.
(f) Additional leave provided by paragraphs (b) and (d) of this subclause
shall not be subject to the annual leave loading prescribed
by subclause (12) of
Clause 22. - Annual Leave of this Award.
(g) Work performed by an employee in excess of the ordinary hours of the
employee's shift or on a rostered day off shall be paid for
in accordance with
the overtime provisions of Clause 21. - Overtime of this Award.
(h) (i) When an employee begins or ceases a shift between the hours of 11.00
pm and 7.00 am and no public transport is available,
reimbursement at the
appropriate rate of hire prescribed by subclause (4) of Clause 41- Motor Vehicle
Allowance of this Award shall
be made if the employee's private motor vehicle or
cycle is used for the journey between the employee's residence and headquarters
and the return journey.
Provided however, that any employee who, elects to be permanently retained
on a fixed or non -rotating shift that begins or ceases
between or on the hours
of 11.00 pm and 7.00 am shall not be eligible to claim this reimbursement.
(ii) The provisions of this subclause shall only be applied to employees
living and working within a radius of 50 km of the Perth
City Railway
(3) Hours of Duty and Rosters
(a) An employee engaged on shifts shall work a 76-hour fortnight, exclusive
of meal intervals, on the basis of not more than ten (10)
shifts per fortnight
of not more than seven and hours and 36 minutes duration. Provided that where
agreement is reached between
the employer and the Association the length and/or
number of shifts worked per fortnight may be altered.
Provided that when the agreed length of a shift is extended past seven hours
and 36 minutes, overtime shall be payable only for time
worked in excess of the
rostered shift.
Provided also that whenever an agreed alteration to the number of hours per
shift has occurred then the allowance per shift shall
be varied on a pro rata
basis to reflect any variation to other than seven hours and 36 minutes.
(b) Meal breaks shall be for a period of at least thirty (30) minutes, but
not greater than one hour for each meal.
(c) Employees may be rostered to work on any of the seven days of the week
provided that no employee shall be rostered for more than
six (6) consecutive
Provided that where agreement is reached between the employer and the
Association, shift workers may be exempted from this provision.
(d) The roster period shall commence at the beginning of a pay period and
continue for fourteen (14) consecutive days. Rosters shall
be available to
employees at least five (5) clear working days prior to the commencement of the
(e) A roster may only be altered on account of a contingency, which the
employer could not have been reasonably expected to foresee.
When a roster is
altered, the employee concerned shall be notified of the changed shift 24 hours
before the changed shift commences.
Provided that where such notice is not
given, the employee shall be paid overtime in accordance with Clause 21. -
Overtime Allowance
of this Award for the duration of the changed shift. This
provision shall not apply to an employee who was absent from duty on the
employee's last rostered shift.
(f) An employee shall not be rostered for duty until at least ten (10) hours
have elapsed from the time the employee's previous rostered
shift ended.
Provided that where agreement is reached between the Association and the
employer the ten (10) hour break may be reduced
to accommodate special shift
arrangements, except that under no circumstances shall such an agreement provide
for a break of less
than eight (8) hours.
(g) An employee shall not be retained permanently on one shift unless the
employee so elects in writing.
(h) Employees shall be allowed to exchange shifts or days off with other
employees provided the approval of the employer has been
obtained and provided
further that any excess hours worked shall not involve the payment of
21. - OVERTIME ALLOWANCE
(1) In this clause the following expressions shall have the following
"prescribed hours of duty" means the employee's normal working hours as
prescribed in Clause 19. - Hours of this Award, or written
instruction issued
out of that clause.
“public holiday means the days prescribed in Clause 23 – Public
Holidays of this Award.
"ordinary travelling time" means the time which an employee would ordinarily
spend in travelling by public transport once daily from
the employee's home to
the employee's usual headquarters and home again. It is the
time elapsing between the time of departure from home and the official time
of commencement of duty and the official time of cessation
of duty and arrival
at home. Where an employee has a continuing approval to use a vehicle for
official business, ordinary travelling
time means the time spent in travelling
by that vehicle from home to headquarters and home again each day.
"a day" shall mean from midnight to midnight.
(2) When and as often as it is necessary to overcome arrears of work or to
meet pressure of business, any employee may be required
by the employer to
perform overtime duty at times other than the ordinary hours of attendance
applicable to that employee.
(3) Reasonable Hours of Overtime
(a) An employer may require an employee to work reasonable overtime at
overtime rates.
(b) An employee may refuse to work overtime in circumstances where the
working of such overtime would result in the employee working
hours which are
unreasonable having regard to:
(i) any risk to employee health and safety;
(ii) the employee's personal circumstances including any family
responsibilities;
(iii) the needs of the workplace or enterprise;
(iv) the notice, if any, given by the employer of the overtime and by the
employee of his or her intention to refuse it; and
(v) any other relevant matter.
(4) (a) All work performed by an employee whose hours of attendance are
determined in accordance with subclause (1) of Clause 19.
- Hours of this Award
by direction of the employer:
(i) before or after the prescribed hours of duty on a weekday; and
(ii) on a Saturday, Sunday or public holiday, shall be classed as overtime
and, subject to the provisions of this clause, shall
be paid for the hourly rate
prescribed in paragraph (b) of this subclause.
(b) (i) Payment for overtime shall be calculated on an hourly basis in
accordance with the following formula –
For the first three hours on any one week day –
Fortnightly wage
After the first three hours on any one week day -
Fortnightly wage
First three hours on any Saturday -
Fortnightly wage
After the first three hours or after 12.00 noon, whichever is the earlier, on
any Saturday -
Fortnightly wage
Fortnightly wage
Public Holidays:
During prescribed hours of duty
Fortnightly wage
in addition to the normal day’s pay.
During hours outside of prescribed hours of duty -
Fortnightly wage
(ii) For the purposes of this clause fortnightly wage shall not include any
district allowances, personal allowances, service allowances,
special allowances
or higher duties allowance, unless otherwise approved by the
Provided that a special allowance or higher duties allowance shall be
included in "fortnightly wage" when overtime is worked on duties
for which these
allowances are specifically paid.
(c) Subject to prior agreement in writing, time off in lieu of payment may
be granted by the employer. Such time off in lieu to
be determined on an hourly
basis by dividing the normal hourly rate of pay into the amount to which the
employee would otherwise
have been entitled at the prescribed rate in accordance
with paragraph (b) of this subclause.
The employee shall be required to clear accumulated time off in lieu within
two months of the overtime being performed. If the employer
is unable to
release the employee to clear such leave, then the employee shall be paid for
the overtime worked.
Provided that by agreement between the employer and the employee, time off in
lieu of overtime may be able to be accumulated beyond
two months from the time
the overtime is performed so as to be taken in conjunction with periods of
(d) Any time off in lieu of overtime, other than that provided in paragraph
(c) of this subclause shall be only negotiated between
the employer and the
Association.
(e) No claim for payment of overtime or time off in lieu under the provisions
of this clause shall be allowed in respect of any day
on which the additional
time worked amounts to 30 minutes or less.
(f) (i) Where an employee having received prior notice is required to return
(aa) On a Saturday , Sunday or public holiday otherwise than during
prescribed hours of duty the employee shall be entitled
to payment at the
rate in accordance with paragraph (b) of this subclause for a minimum
period of three hours.
(bb) Before or after the prescribed hours
of duty on a weekday the employee shall be entitled to payment at the rate
in accordance
with paragraph (b) of this subclause for a minimum period of
one hour 30 minutes.
(ii) For the purposes of this paragraph, where an employee is required to
alone in respect to
the application of minimum period payment except where the second or subsequent
such minimum period.
(iii) The provisions of this subparagraph shall not apply in cases where it
is customary for an employee to return to the employee's
place of employment to
perform a specific job outside the employee's prescribed hours of duty or where
the overtime is continuous
(subject to a meal break) with the completion or
commencement of prescribed hours of duty.
(g) When an employee is directed to work overtime at a place other than the
usual headquarters, and provided that place where the
overtime is to be worked
is situated in the area within a radius of 50 kilometres from the usual
headquarters, and the time spent
in travelling to and from that place is in
excess of the time which an employee would ordinarily spend in travelling to and
the usual headquarters, and provided such travel is undertaken on the same
day as the overtime is worked, then such excess time shall
be deemed to form
part of the overtime worked.
(h) Except as provided in paragraph (b) of subclause (6) and paragraph (b) of
subclause (5) of this clause when an employee is directed
to work overtime at a
place other than the usual headquarters and provided that place where the
overtime is to be worked is situated
outside the area within the radius of 50
kilometres from the usual headquarters and the time spent in travelling to and
place is in excess of the time which an employee would ordinarily
spend in travelling to and from the usual headquarters, then the
employee shall
be granted time off in lieu of such excess time spent in actual travel in
accordance with subclause (7).
(i) Except as provided in paragraph (k) of this subclause, payment for
overtime, or the granting of time off in lieu of overtime or
travelling time,
shall not be approved where the employee’s work is not subject to close
supervision.
(j) Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph (i) of this subclause, where
from the nature of the duties required or from other
relevant circumstances it
appears just and reasonable, any such employee as is referred to in that
paragraph shall, with the special
approval of the employer be paid overtime or
granted time off in lieu as prescribed by paragraph (b) or paragraph (c)
respectively
of this subclause and where in any such case the employer declines
to give such special approval the matter may be referred to the
Public Service
Arbitrator. When an employee not subject to close supervision is directed by
the employer to carry out specific duties
involving the working of overtime, and
provided such overtime can be reasonably determined, then such employee shall be
to payment or time off in lieu of overtime worked in accordance with
paragraph (b) or paragraph (c) of this subclause.
(k) (i) Where an employee performs overtime duty after the time at which the
employee's normal hours of duty end on one day and before
the time at which the
employee's normal hours of duty are to commence on the next succeeding day which
results in the employee not
being off duty between these times for a continuous
period of not less than ten hours, the employee is entitled to be absent from
duty without loss of wage from the time of ceasing overtime duty, until the
employee has been off duty for a continuous period of
(ii) Provided that where an employee is required to return to or continue
work without the break provided in subparagraph (i) of this
paragraph then the
employee shall be paid at double the ordinary rate until released from duty or
until the employee has had ten
consecutive hours off duty without loss of wage
for ordinary working time occurring during such absence.
(iii) The provisions of this paragraph shall not apply to employees included
in subclause (5) of this clause.
(l) Where an employee is required to work a continuous period of overtime
which extends passed midnight into the succeeding day the
time worked after
midnight shall be included with that worked before midnight for the purpose of
calculation of payment provided
for in paragraph (b) of this subclause.
(5) (a) For the purpose of this subclause:
“Standby” shall mean a written instruction or other authorised
direction by the employer or a duly authorised employee
to an employee to remain
at the employee's place of employment during any period outside the employee's
normal hours of duty, and
to perform certain designated tasks periodically or on
an irregular basis. Such employee shall be provided with appropriate facilities
for sleeping if attendance is overnight, and other personal needs, where
practicable.
Other than in extraordinary circumstances, employees shall not be required to
perform more than two periods of standby in any rostered
This provision shall not replace normal overtime or shift work
requirements.
“On Call” shall mean a written instruction or other authorised
direction by the employer or a duly authorised employee
to an employee rostered
to remain at the employee's residence or to otherwise be immediately contactable
by telephone or other means
outside the employee's normal hours of duty in case
of a call out requiring an immediate return to duty.
“Availability” shall mean a written instruction or other
authorised direction by the employer or a duly authorised employee
employee to remain contactable, but not necessarily immediately contactable by
telephone or other means, outside the employee's
normal hours of duty and be
available and in a fit state at all such times for recall to duty.
“Availability” will not include situations in which employees
carry telephones or other means or make their telephone
numbers or other contact
details available only in the event that they may be needed for casual contact
or recall to work. Subject
to paragraph (i) of subclause (4) of this clause
recall to work under such circumstances would constitute emergency duty in
with subclause (6) of this clause.
Out of Hours Contact
(b) Except as otherwise agreed between the employer and the Association, an
employee who is required by the employer to be on "out
of hours contact" during
periods off duty shall be paid the fixed allowance prescribed in Part 1 - Out Of
Hours Contact of Schedule
D - Clause 21.– Overtime Allowance, for each
hour or part thereof that the employee is on “out of hours
Provided that payment in accordance with this paragraph shall not be made
with respect to any period for which payment is made in
accordance with the
provisions of subclause (4) of this clause when the employee is recalled to
(c) Where an employee is required to be on "on call" or "available" and the
means of contact is to be by landline or satellite telephone
fixed at the
employee's residence the employer shall:
(i) Where the telephone is not already installed, pay the cost of such
installation;
(ii) Where an employee pays or contributes towards the payment of the rental
of such telephone, pay the employee 1/52nd of the annual
rental paid by the
employee for each seven days or part thereof on which an employee is rostered to
be on "on call" or "availability";
(iii) Provided that where as a usual feature of the duties an employee is
regularly rostered to be on "on call" or "availability",
pay the full amount of
the telephone rental.
(iv) When an employee is required to "on call" or "available" and the means
of contact is other than a landline/satellite telephone
fixed at the employee's
residence, the employer shall provide the employee with the means of contact
free of charge for the purposes
of work related activity.
(d) An employee shall be reimbursed the cost of all telephone calls made on
behalf of the employer as a result of contact pursuant
to paragraph (a) of this
(e) Where an employee rostered for "on call" or "availability" is recalled
for duty during the period for which the employee is on
"out of hours contact"
then the employee shall receive payment for hours worked in accordance with
paragraph (b) of subclause (4)
of this clause.
(f) Time spent in travelling to and from the place of duty where an employee
rostered on "on call" or "availability" is actually recalled
to duty, shall be
included with actual duty performed for purposes of overtime payment.
(g) Minimum payment provisions do not apply to an employee rostered for "out
of hours contact" duty.
(h) An employee in receipt of an "out of hours contact" allowance and who is
recalled to duty shall not be regarded as having performed
emergency duty in
accordance with subclause (6) of this clause.
(i) Employees subject to this clause shall, where practicable, be
periodically absented from any requirement to hold themselves on
"standby", "on
call" or "availability".
(6) (a) (i) Where an employee is called on duty to meet an emergency at a
time when the employee would not ordinarily have been on
duty and no notice of
such call was given prior to completion of usual duty on the last day of work
prior to the day on which the
employee is called on duty, then, if called to
(aa) on a Saturday, Sunday or public holiday otherwise than during the
prescribed hours of duty the employee shall be entitled to
payment at the rate
in accordance with paragraph (b) of subclause (4) of this clause for a minimum
period of three hours;
(bb) before or after the prescribed hours of duty on a weekday the employee
shall be entitled to payment at the rate in accordance
with paragraph (b) of
subclause (4) of this clause for a minimum period of two hours 30 minutes;
(ii) for the purpose of this subclause, where an employee is recalled more
than once, each period of emergency duty shall stand alone
in respect to the
application of the minimum period payment, subject to paragraph (c) of this
(b) Time spent in travelling to and from the place of duty where the employee
is actually recalled to perform emergency duty shall
be included with actual
duty performed for the purposes of overtime payment.
(c) An employee recalled to work to perform emergency duty shall not be
obliged to work for the minimum period if the work is completed
in less time,
provided that an employee called out more than once within any such minimum
period shall not be entitled to any further
payment for the time worked within
that minimum period.
(7) An employee eligible for payment of overtime in accordance with paragraph
(j) of subclause (4) of this clause, who is required
to travel on official
business outside of the employee's normal working hours and away from the
employee's usual headquarters, shall
be granted time off in lieu of such actual
time spent in travelling at equivalent or ordinary rates on weekdays and at time
half rates on Saturdays, Sundays, and public holidays, provided:-
(a) Such travel is undertaken at the direction of the employer.
(b) Such travel shall not include -
(i) time spent in travelling by an employee on duty at a temporary
headquarters to the employee's home for weekends for the employee's
convenience;
(ii) time spent in travelling by plane between the hours of 11.00 pm and 6.00
(iii) time spent in travelling by train or coach between the hours of 11.00
pm and 6.00 am;
(iv) time spent in travelling by ship when meals and accommodation are
(v) time spent in travel resulting from the permanent transfer or promotion
of an employee to a new location;
(vi) time in travelling in which an employee is required by the employer to
drive, outside ordinary hours of duty, an employer's vehicle
or to drive the
employee's own motor vehicle involving the payment of motor vehicle allowance
but such time shall be deemed to be
overtime and paid in accordance with
paragraph (b) of subclause (4) of this clause.
(c) Time off in lieu will not be granted for periods of less than thirty
(d) Where such travel is undertaken on a normal working day, time off in lieu
is granted only for such time spent in travelling before
and/or after the usual
hours of duty, and where an employee is required to travel during the employee's
usual lunch interval such
additional travelling time is not to be taken into
account in computing the number of hours of travelling time due.
(e) Where such travel is undertaken on a normal working day, time off in lieu
is granted only for such time spent in travelling before
and/or after the usual
hours of duty which is in excess of the employee's ordinary travelling time.
(f) Except as provided in paragraph (b) of this subclause, all time spent in
actual travel on Saturdays, Sundays, and public holidays
provided in Clause 23.
- Public Holidays of this Award, shall be deemed to be excess travelling
(8) (a) A break of 30 minutes, shall be made for meals between 12.00 noon and
2.00 p.m. and between 5.00 p.m. and 7.00 p.m. when overtime
duty is being
Except in the case of emergency, an employee shall not be compelled to work
more than five hours' overtime duty without a meal break.
At the conclusion of
a meal break the calculation of the five hours limit recommences.
(b) An employee required to work overtime who purchases a meal shall be
reimbursed for each meal purchased at the rate prescribed
for that meal in Part
2 of Schedule D – Clause 21. – Overtime Allowance of this Award.
Provided that the overtime worked when such a meal is purchased totals not
less than two hours, such reimbursement shall be in addition
to any payment for
overtime to which the employee is entitled.
(c) If an employee, having received prior notification of a requirement to
work overtime, is no longer required, then the employee
shall be entitled, in
addition to any other penalty, to reimbursement for a meal previously
(9) Any group of employees whose duties necessarily entail special conditions
of employment shall not be subject to the prescribed
hours of duty as defined in
subclause (1) of this clause if the employer and the Association so agree.
22. - ANNUAL LEAVE
(1) (a) Except as provided in subclause (10) of this clause, each employee is
entitled to four weeks' leave on full pay for each year
of service. Annual
leave shall be calculated on a calendar year basis commencing on January 1 in
(b) An employee may take annual leave during the calendar year in which it
accrues, but the time during which the leave may be taken
is subject to the
approval of the employer.
(c) An employee who is first appointed after January 1 is entitled to
pro-rata annual leave for that year in accordance with the formula
contained in
subclause (2) of this clause.
(d) To assist employees in balancing their work and family responsibilities,
an employee may elect, with the consent of the employer,
to accrue and carry
forward a maximum of two years annual leave from the date of the
entitlement.
(2) Entitlement
(a) An employee employed after the first day of January in any year is
entitled to pro rata annual leave for that year calculated
on a daily basis. At
the end of each calendar day of the year the employee will accrue 0.416 hours of
paid annual leave provided
the maximum accrual will not exceed 152 hours for
each completed calendar year of service.
(b) Where employers have systems in place which record and report pro rata
accrual of annual leave entitlements in a manner other
than prescribed by this
clause, that method of accrual may continue provided the system provides the
same accrual over a full year.
Employers must ensure that upon the cessation of
employment, all pro rata annual leave entitlements accrued are equivalent to the
pro rata annual leave entitlement provided by clause 22(2)(a).
(3) Annual leave shall be taken in one period unless otherwise approved by
the employer.
(4) On written application, an employee shall be paid wage in advance when
proceeding on annual leave.
(5) (a) When the convenience of the employer is serviced, the employer may
approve the deferment of the commencing date for taking
annual leave, but such
approval shall only remain in force for a period of one year.
(b) The employer may renew the approval referred to in subclause (a) of this
clause for a further period of a year or further periods
of a year but so that
an employee does not at any time accumulate more than three years'
entitlement.
(c) Where the convenience of the employer is served, the employer may approve
the deferment of the commencement date for taking leave
so that an employee
accumulates more than three years' entitlement, subject to any condition which
the employer may determine.
(d) When an employee who has received approval to defer the commencement date
for taking annual leave under paragraph (a), (b) or
(c) of this subclause next
proceeds on annual leave, the annual leave first accrued shall be the first
leave taken.
(6) An employee who, during an accrual period was subject to variations in
ordinary working hours or whose ordinary working hours
during the accrual period
are less than the employee's ordinary working hours at the time of commencement
of annual leave, may elect
to take a lesser period of annual leave calculated by
converting the average ordinary working hours during the accrual period to
equivalent ordinary hours at the time of commencement of annual leave.
(7) On application to the employer, a lump sum payment for the money
equivalent of any:
(a) Accrued annual leave as prescribed by subclause (1) or sub clause (6) of
this clause shall be made to an employee who resigns,
retires, is retired or in
respect of an employee who dies. The provisions of this paragraph shall also
apply to an employee who
is dismissed unless the misconduct for which the
employee has been dismissed occurred prior to the completion of the qualifying
(b) Pro rata annual leave shall be made to an employee who resigns, retires,
is retired or in respect of an employee who dies but
not to an employee who is
(8) An employee who has been permitted to proceed on annual recreation leave
and who ceases duty before completing the required continuous
service to accrue
the leave must refund the value of the unearned pro rata portion calculated at
the rate of wage as at the date
the leave was taken, but no refund is required
in the event of the death of an employee.
(9) When computing the annual leave due under this clause, no deduction shall
be made from such leave in respect of the period an
employee is on annual leave,
observing a public holiday prescribed by this award, absence through sickness
with or without pay.
This provision applies except for that portion of an
absence through sickness without pay that exceeds three months, absence on
compensation except for that portion of an absence that exceeds
six months, or any period exceeding two weeks during which the employee
absent on leave without pay.
(10) Every employee, to whom the employer has granted annual leave in excess
of four weeks because of special circumstances shall
be credited with such
additional leave on a pro rata basis according to the following formula:-
Completed Month of Service
Pro rata Annual Leave (working days)
Five (5) Additional Days
Ten (10) Additional Days
(11) Notwithstanding the foregoing, but subject to paragraph (1)(d) of this
clause, the employer may direct an employee to take accrued
annual leave and may
determine the date on which such leave shall commence. Should the employee not
comply with the direction, disciplinary
action may be taken against the
(12) (a) Subject to subclauses (2) and (4) of this clause a loading
equivalent to 17½% of normal wage is payable to employees
proceeding on
annual leave, including accumulated annual leave.
(b) Subject to the provisions of subclauses (4) of this clause shift workers
who are granted an additional week's penalty leave when
proceeding on annual
leave including accumulated annual leave shall be paid:
(i) shift and weekend penalties the employee would have received had the
employee not proceeded on annual leave; or
(ii) loading equivalent to 20% of normal salary for five weeks' leave;
whichever is greater.
(c) Subject to the provisions of subclause (6) the loading is paid on a
maximum of four weeks' annual leave, or five weeks in the
case of shift workers
who are granted an additional week's penalty leave. Payment of the loading is
not made on additional leave
granted for any other purpose.
(d) Annual leave commencing in any year and extending without a break into
the following year attracts the loading calculated on the
wage applicable on the
day the leave commenced. The maximum loading payable shall be that applicable
on the day the leave is commenced.
(e) The loading payable on approved accumulated annual leave shall be at the
rate applicable at the date the leave is commenced.
Under these circumstances
an employee can receive up to the maximum loading for the approved accumulated
annual leave in addition
to the loading for the current year's entitlement.
(f) A pro rata loading is payable on periods of approved annual leave less
than four weeks.
(g) The loading is calculated on the rate of wage the employee receives at
the commencement of leave under Schedule B – Wages
of this Award and,
where applicable, the wage shall include the following allowances:
(i) Protective Clothing Allowance, where it is paid as an annual
(ii) Higher Duties Allowance, but only where the specific conditions of
Clause 18. - Higher Duties Allowance of this Award are satisfied.
(h) Where payment in lieu of accrued or pro rata annual leave is made on the
death, dismissal, resignation or retirement of an employee,
a loading calculated
in accordance with the terms of this clause is to be paid. Provided that no
loading shall be payable in respect
of pro rata annual leave paid on resignation
or where an employee is dismissed for misconduct.
(i) Part-time employees shall be paid a pro rata loading at the wage rate
applicable.
(j) An employee who has been permitted to proceed on annual leave and who
ceases duty before completing the required continuous service
to accrue the
leave must refund the value of the unearned pro rata portion. Provided that no
refund shall be necessary in the event
of the death of an employee.
23. - PUBLIC HOLIDAYS
(1) The following days shall be allowed as holidays with pay:
New Year's Day, Australia Day, Good Friday, Easter Monday, Christmas Day,
Boxing Day, Anzac Day, Sovereign's Birthday, Western Australia
Day, Labour Day,
provided that the employer may approve another day to be taken as a holiday in
lieu of any of the above mentioned
(2) When any of the days mentioned in subclause (1) of this clause falls on a
Saturday or on a Sunday, the holiday shall be observed
on the next succeeding
When Boxing Day falls on a Sunday or Monday, the holiday shall be observed on
the next succeeding Tuesday.
In each case the substituted day shall be a holiday without deduction of pay
and the day for which it is substituted shall not be
24. - LONG SERVICE LEAVE
(1) Subject to subclause (4) of this clause an employee who has completed ten
years' continuous service with the employer shall be
entitled to 13 weeks' long
service leave on full pay.
(2) For each subsequent period of seven years' service an employee shall be
entitled to an additional 13 weeks' long service leave
on full pay.
(3) (a) Subject to the employer's convenience, an employer may approve an
employee's application to take a complete entitlement of
long service leave on
full pay or half pay, or may allow the employee to take the leave in minimum
periods of one (1) day.
(b) Employees may by agreement with their employer, access any portion of an
accrued entitlement to long service leave on double
pay for half the period
accrued. In these circumstances the leave actually taken is 50 percent of the
accrued entitlement accessed.
(c) Where employees proceed on long service leave on double pay in accordance
with this subclause, the entitlement accessed is excised
for the purpose of
continuous service in accordance with subclause (4).
(4) For the purposes of determining an employee's long service leave
entitlement under the provisions of subclauses (1), (2) and (3)
of this clause
the expression "continuous service" includes any period during which the
employee is absent on full pay or part pay
from the employee duties, but does
not include:
(a) any period exceeding two weeks during which the employee is absent on
leave without pay or parental leave without pay, unless
the employer determines
(b) any period during which the employee is taking long service leave
entitlement or any portion thereof except in the case of subclause
(13) of this
clause when the period excised will equate to a full entitlement of 13
(c) any service by an employee who resigns, is dismissed or whose services
are otherwise terminated other than service prior to such
resignation, dismissal
or termination when that prior service had actually entitled the employee to the
long service leave provided
under this clause;
(d) any period of service that was taken into account in ascertaining the
amount of a lump sum payment in lieu of long service leave;
(5) Any public holiday prescribed in Clause 23. - Public Holidays of this
Award which occurs during the period an employee is on long
service leave shall
be treated as part of the long service leave and extra days in lieu thereof
shall not be granted.
(6) (a) Long service leave shall be taken within three years of it becoming
due, at the convenience of the employer. Provided that
the employer may approve
the deferment of long service leave in exceptional circumstances. Provided
further that such exceptional
circumstances shall include retirement within five
years of the date of entitlement.
(b) Approval to defer the taking of long service leave may be withdrawn or
varied at any time by the employer giving the employee
notice in writing of the
withdrawal or variation.
(7) On application to the employer a lump sum payment for the money
equivalent of any:
(a) long service leave entitlement for continuous service as provided in
subclause (1) and subclause (2) of this clause shall be made
to an employee who
resigns, retires, is retired or is dismissed or in respect of an employee who
(b) pro rata long service leave based on continuous service of a lesser
period than that provided in subclause (1) and subclause (2)
of this clause for
a long service leave entitlement shall be made -
(i) to an employee who retires at or over the age of 55 years or who is
retired on the grounds of ill health, if the employee has
completed not less
than 12 months' continuous service before the date of retirement;
(ii) to an employee who, not having resigned, is retired by the employer for
any other cause, if the employee has completed not less
than three years'
continuous service before the date of retirement; or
(iii) in respect of an employee who dies, if the employee has completed not
less than 12 months' continuous service before the date
(c) in the case of a deceased employee, payment shall be made to the estate
of the employee unless the employee is survived by a legal
dependant approved by
the employer, in which case payment shall be made to the legal dependant.
(8) The calculation of the amount due for long service leave accrued and for
pro rata long service leave shall be made at the rate
of wage of an employee at
the date of retirement or resignation or death, whichever applies.
(9) An employee prior to commencing long service leave may request approval
for the substitution of another date for commencement
of long service leave and
the employer may approve such substitution.
(10) (a) Notwithstanding the provisions contained in this subclause where an
employee was, immediately prior to being employed by
the employer, employed in
the service of the public in Western Australia or any other state body in
Western Australia that employee
shall be entitled to long service leave
determined in the manner contained in this subclause. Provided that the period
immediately
prior to being employed in Dental Health Services and the date the
employee ceased the previous employment described in this subclause
exceed one week or a further period as determined by the employer.
(b) (i) The pro rata portion of long service leave to which the employee
would have been entitled to up to the date of appointment
shall be calculated in
accordance with the provisions that applied to the previous employment referred
to. However in calculating
that period of pro rata long service leave, any long
service leave taken or any benefit granted in lieu of any such
long service leave during that employment shall be deducted from any long
service leave to which the employee may become entitled
to under this
(ii) The balance of long service leave entitlement of the employee shall be
calculated in accordance with the provisions contained
in this clause.
(c) Nothing in this clause confers on any employee previously employed by
those bodies specified in subclause (10)(a) of this clause
any entitlement to a
complete period of long service leave that accrued in the employee's favour
prior to the date on which the employee
commenced employment in the public
(11) An employee who has elected to retire at or over the age of 55 years and
who will complete not less than 12 months' continuous
service before the date of
retirement may make application to take pro rata long service leave before the
date of retirement.
(12) (a) A full time employee who, during a qualifying period towards an
entitlement of long service leave was employed continuously
on both a full and
part time basis may elect to take a lesser period of long service leave
calculated by converting the part-time
service to equivalent full time
(b) A full time employee who, during a qualifying period towards an
entitlement of long service leave was employed continuously on
a part time basis
may elect to take a lesser period of long service leave calculated by converting
the part time service to equivalent
full time service.
(13) Cash Out of Accrued Long Service Leave Entitlement
(a) Employees may by agreement with their employer, cash out any portion of
an accrued entitlement to long service leave, provided
the employee proceeds on
a minimum of ten (10) days annual leave in that calendar year.
(b) Where employees cash out any portion of an accrued entitlement to long
service leave in accordance with this subclause, the entitlement
accessed is
excised for the purpose of continuous service in accordance with subclause (4)
of this clause.
25. - SICK LEAVE
(1) For the purposes of this clause "service" shall not include:
(a) any period exceeding 14 calendar days during which an employee is absent
on leave without pay. In the case of leave without pay
which exceeds 14
calendar days, the entire period of such leave without pay is excised in
(b) any period which exceeds six months in one continuous period during which
an employee is absent on workers' compensation. Provided
that only that portion
of such continuous absence which exceeds six months shall not count as
(c) any period which exceeds three months in one continuous period during
which an employee is absent on sick leave without pay.
Provided that only that
portion of such continuous absence which exceeds three months shall not count as
(2) In the case of personal illness or injury of an employee the employer
shall grant the employee leave of absence in accordance
with the provisions
contained in this clause.
(3) The basis for determining the entitlement to leave of absence on the
grounds of illness which an employee may be granted shall
be ascertained by
crediting the employee concerned with the following sick leave credits, which
shall be cumulative:
Leave On full pay (Hours)
Leave On half pay (Hours)
On date of appointment
On completion of six months' continuous service
On completion of twelve months' continuous service and on completion of
each further period of twelve months' continuous service
(4) An application for sick leave exceeding two consecutive working days
shall be supported by evidence to satisfy a reasonable person.
(5) The number of days sick leave which may be granted without production of
evidence that would satisfy a reasonable person required
by subclause (4) of
this clause shall not exceed, in the aggregate, five working days in any one
credit year.
(6) Where an application for sick leave is supported by the certificate of a
registered medical practitioner, a further certificate
from a registered medical
practitioner nominated by the employer may be required and if that certificate
does not confirm or substantially
confirm the certificate of the medical
practitioner, the employee making the application for sick leave shall pay the
the nominated medical practitioner in respect of the certificate.
(7) Where the employer has occasion to doubt the cause of illness or the
reason for the absence the employer may arrange for a registered
practitioner to visit and examine the employee or may direct the employee to
attend the registered medical practitioner for
examination. If the report of
the medical practitioner does not confirm that the employee is ill or if the
employee is not available
for examination at the time of the visit of the
medical practitioner or if the employee fails, without reasonable cause to
the medical practitioner when directed to do so, the fee payable for the
examination, appointment or visit shall be paid by the employee.
(8) Where an employee is ill during the period of annual leave for a period
of at least seven consecutive calendar days; or long service
leave for a period
of at least 14 consecutive calendar days and produces at the time or as soon as
possible thereafter medical evidence
satisfactory to the employer that the
employee is or was as a result of the illness confined to the employee's place
of residence
or a hospital, the employer may grant sick leave for the period
during which the employee was so confined and reinstate annual or
long service
leave equivalent to the period of confinement.
(9) Where an employee is absent on account of illness and that employee's
entitlement to sick leave on full pay is exhausted, the
employee may elect to
convert any part of the entitlement to sick leave on half pay to sick leave on
full pay, but so that the employee's
sick leave entitlement on half pay is
reduced by two hours for each hour of sick leave on full pay that the employee
receives by
the conversion.
(10) An employee who is absent on leave without pay is not eligible for sick
leave during the currency of that leave without pay.
(11) No sick leave shall be granted with pay if the illness or injury has
been caused by the misconduct of the employee or in any
case of absence from
duty without sufficient cause.
(12) An employee, who has resigned, is subsequently reappointed such employee
shall for the purposes of this clause be regarded as
a new appointee as from the
date of reappointment.
(13) Where an employee who has been retired on medical grounds resumes duty,
sick leave credits at the date of retirement shall be
reinstated.
(14) (a) If the employer has reason to believe that an employee is in such a
state of health as to render him a danger to fellow employees
or the public, the
employer may require the employee to obtain and furnish a report as to the
employee's condition from a registered
medical practitioner or may require the
employee to submit him/herself for examination by a medical practitioner
nominated by the
employer. The fee for any such examination shall be paid by
the employer.
(b) Upon receipt of the medical report, the employer may direct the employee
to be absent from duty for a specified period or, if
already on leave of
absence, direct the employee to continue on leave for a specified period. Such
leave shall be regarded as sick
(15) (a) Upon report by a registered medical practitioner that, by reason of
and through the
operation of restrictions imposed by Commonwealth or State law in respect of
that disease, an employee is unable
to attend for duty, the employee concerned
may be granted sick leave or, at the option of the employee, the whole or any
of the leave may be deducted from accrued annual leave or long service
(b) Leave granted under paragraph (a) of this subclause shall not be granted
for any period beyond the earliest date at which it would
be practicable for the
employee to resume duty, having regard to the restrictions imposed by law.
(16) Where an employee suffers an injury within the meaning of
Workers' Compensation and Injury Management Act 1981
which necessitates that the employee being absent from duty, sick leave with pay
shall be granted to the extent of sick leave
credits. In accordance with
Section 80(2)
Workers' Compensation and Injury Management Act
(WA) where the claim for workers' compensation is decided in favour of
the employee, sick leave credit is to be reinstated and the
period of absence
shall be granted as sick leave without pay.
(17) (a) An employee who produces a certificate from the Department of
Veterans' Affairs stating that the employee suffers from war
caused illness, may
be granted special sick leave credits of 15.2 working days per annum on full pay
in respect of that war caused
These credits shall accumulate up to a maximum credit of 49.4 working days,
and shall be recorded separately to the employee's normal
(b) Every application for sick leave for war caused illness shall be
supported by a certificate from a registered medical practitioner
nature of the illness.
(18) Where an employee was, immediately prior to being employed in Dental
Health Services, employed in the service of the public service
Australia or any other State body of Western Australia and the period between
the date when the employee ceased previous
employment and the date of commencing
employment in Dental Health Services, does not exceed one week or such other
period as approved
by the employer, the employer may credit that employee
additional sick leave credits up to those held at the date the employee ceased
previous employment.
26. - CARERS LEAVE
(1) An employee is entitled to use, each year, up to ten (10) days of the
employee's sick leave entitlement per year to be the primary
care giver of a
member of the employee’s family or household who is ill or injured and in
need of immediate care and attention.
(2) Employees shall, wherever practical, give the employer notice of the
intention to take carers leave and the estimated length of
absence. If it is
not practicable to give prior notice of absence employees shall notify the
employer as soon as possible on the
first day of absence.
(3) Employees shall provide, where required by the employer, evidence to
establish the requirement to take carers leave. An application
for carers leave
exceeding two (2) consecutive working days shall be supported by evidence that
would satisfy a reasonable person
of the entitlement.
(4) The definition of family shall be a person who is related to the employee
by blood, marriage, affinity or adoption and includes
a person who is wholly or
mainly dependent on, or is a member of the household of, the employee.
(5) Carers leave may be taken on an hourly basis or part thereof.
27. - PARENTAL LEAVE
(1) Definitions
"Employee" includes full time, part-time, permanent and fixed term contract
"Partner" means a person who is a spouse or de facto partner.
"Primary Care Giver" is the employee who will assume the principal role for
the care and attention of a child/children. The employer
may require
confirmation of primary care giver status.
"Public sector" means an employing authority as defined in Section 5 of the
Public Sector Management Act 1994
"Replacement Employee" is an employee specifically engaged to replace an
employee proceeding on parental leave.
(2) Entitlement to Parental and Partner Leave
(a) An employee is entitled to a period of up to 52 weeks unpaid parental
leave in respect of the:
(i) birth of a child to the employee or the employee's partner; or
(ii) adoption of a child who is not the child or the stepchild of the
employee or the employee's partner; is under the age of five
(5); and has not
lived continuously with the employee for six (6) months or longer.
(b) An employee identified as the primary care giver of a child and who has
completed twelve months continuous service in the Western
Australian public
sector shall be entitled to fourteen (14) weeks paid parental leave which will
form part of the 52 week entitlement
provided in paragraph (2)(a) of this
(c) An employee may take the paid parental leave specified in paragraph
(2)(b) at half pay for a period equal to twice the period
to which the employee
would otherwise be entitled
(d) A pregnant employee can commence the period of paid parental leave any
time up to six (6) weeks before the expected date of birth
and no later than
four (4) weeks after the birth. Any other primary care giver can commence the
period of paid parental leave from
the birth date or for the purposes of
adoption from the placement of the child but no later than four (4) weeks after
the birth or
placement of the child.
(e) Paid parental leave for primary care purposes for any one birth or
adoption shall not exceed the period specified in paragraphs
(2)(b) and (2)(c)
(f) The paid and unpaid parental leave entitlement up to a maximum of 52
weeks may be shared between partners assuming the role of
primary care
(g) Parental leave may only be taken concurrently by an employee and his or
her partner as provided for in subclause (3) or under
special circumstances with
the approval of the employer.
(h) Where less than the standard parental leave is taken the unused portion
of the period of paid or unpaid leave cannot be preserved
in any way.
(i) An employee may elect to receive pay in advance for the period of paid
parental leave at the time the parental leave commences,
or may elect to be paid
the entitlement on a fortnightly basis over the period of the paid parental
(j) An employee is eligible, without resuming duty, for subsequent periods
of parental leave in accordance with the provisions of
this clause.
(3) Partner Leave
(a) An employee who is not a primary care giver shall be entitled to a period
of unpaid partner leave of up to one (1) weeks at the
time of the birth of a
child/children to his or her partner. In the case of adoption of a child this
period shall be increased to
up to three (3) weeks unpaid leave.
(b) The employee may request to extend the period of unpaid partner leave up
to a maximum of eight weeks.
(4) Birth of a child
(a) An employee shall provide the employer with a medical certificate from a
registered medical practitioner naming the employee,
or the employee's partner
confirming the pregnancy and the estimated date of birth.
(b) If the pregnancy results in other than a live child or the child dies in
the six weeks immediately after the birth, the entitlement
to paid parental
leave remains intact.
(5) Adoption of a child
(a) An employee seeking to adopt a child shall be entitled to two (2) days
unpaid leave to attend interviews or examinations required
for the adoption
procedure. Employees working or residing outside the Perth metropolitan area
are entitled to an additional day’s
unpaid leave. The employee may take
any paid leave entitlement in lieu of this leave.
(b) If an application for parental leave has been granted for the adoption of
a child, which does not eventuate, then the period of
paid or unpaid parental
leave is terminated. Employees may take any other paid leave entitlement in
lieu of the terminated parental
leave or return to work.
(6) Other leave entitlements
(a) An employee proceeding on unpaid parental leave may elect to substitute
any part of that leave with accrued annual leave or long
service leave for the
whole or part of the period of unpaid parental leave.
(b) Subject to all other leave entitlements being exhausted an employee
shall be entitled to apply for leave without pay following
parental leave to
extend their leave by up to two (2) years.
(c) The employer shall only refuse such a request on reasonable grounds
related to the effect on the workplace or the employer’s
business. Such
grounds might include:
(ii) lack of adequate replacement staff;
(iii) loss of efficiency; and
(iv) the impact on customer service.
(d) Any period of leave without pay must be applied for and approved in
advance and will be granted on a year-by-year basis. Where
both partners work
for the employer the total combined period of leave without pay following
parental leave will not exceed two (2)
(e) An employee on parental leave is not entitled to paid sick leave and
other paid absences other than as specified in paragraphs
(6)(a) and (6)(f).
(f) Should the birth or adoption result in other than the arrival of a
living child, the employee shall be entitled to such period
of paid sick leave
or unpaid leave for a period certified as necessary by a registered medical
practitioner. Such paid sick leave
cannot be taken concurrently with paid
parental leave.
(g) Where a pregnant employee not on parental leave suffers illness related
to the pregnancy or is required to undergo a pregnancy
related medical procedure
the employee may take any paid sick leave to which the employee is entitled or
unpaid leave for a period
as certified necessary by a registered medical
practitioner.
(7) Notice and Variation
(a) An employee shall give not less than four (4) weeks’ notice in
writing to the employer of the date the employee proposes
to commence paid or
unpaid parental leave stating the period of leave to be taken.
(b) An employee seeking to adopt a child shall not be in breach of paragraph
(7)(a) by failing to give the required period of notice
if such failure is due
to the requirement of the adoption agency to accept earlier or later placement
of a child, or other compelling
circumstances.
(c) An employee proceeding on parental leave may elect to take a shorter
period of parental leave and may at any time during that
period elect to reduce
or extend the period stated in the original application, provided four (4) weeks
written notice is provided.
(8) Transfer to a Safe Job
Where illness or risks arising out of pregnancy or hazards connected with the
work assigned to the pregnant employee make it inadvisable
for the employee to
continue in her present duties, the duties shall be modified or the employee may
be transferred to a safe position
at the same classification level until the
commencement of parental leave.
(9) Communication during Parental Leave
(a) Where an employee is on parental leave and a definite decision has been
made to introduce significant change at the workplace,
the employer shall take
reasonable steps to:
(i) make information available in relation to any significant effect the
change will have on the status or responsibility level of
the position the
employee held before commencing parental leave; and
(ii) provide an opportunity for the employee to discuss any significant
effect the change will have on the status or responsibility
level of the
position the employee held before commencing parental leave.
(b) The employee shall take reasonable steps to inform the employer about any
significant matter that will affect the employee’s
decision regarding the
duration of parental leave to be taken, whether the employee intends to return
to work and whether the employee
intends to return to work on a part-time
(c) The employee shall also notify the employer of changes of address or
other contact details which might affect the employer’s
capacity to comply
with paragraph (9)(a).
(10) Replacement Employee
Prior to engaging a replacement employee the employer shall inform the person
of the temporary nature of the employment and the entitlements
relating to the
(11) Return to Work
(a) An employee shall confirm the intention to return to work by notice in
writing to the employer not less than four (4) weeks prior
to the expiration of
parental leave.
(b) An employee on return to work from parental leave will be entitled to the
same position or a position equivalent in pay, conditions
and status and
commensurate with the employee’s skill and abilities as the substantive
position held immediately prior to proceeding
on parental leave. Where the
employee was transferred to a safe job the employee is entitled to return to the
position occupied
immediately prior to transfer.
(c) An employee may return on a part-time or job-share basis to the
substantive position occupied prior to the commencement of leave
different position at the same classification level in accordance with Clause 9.
– Part-Time Employment of this Award.
(d) Employees who return to work on a part-time basis have access to the
right of reversion provisions of Clause 9. – Part-Time
Employment of this
(12) Effect of Parental Leave on the Contract of Employment
(a) An employee employed for a fixed term contract shall have the same
entitlement to parental leave, however the period of leave
granted shall not
extend beyond the term of that contract.
(b) Paid parental leave will count as qualifying service for all purposes of
this Award. During paid parental leave at half pay
all entitlements will accrue
as if the employee had taken the entitlement to paid parental leave at full
(c) Absence on unpaid parental leave shall not break the continuity of
service of employees but shall not be taken into account in
calculating the
period of service for any purpose of this Award.
(d) An employee on parental leave may terminate employment at any time
during the period of leave by written notice in accordance
with subclause (2) of
Clause 8. – Contract of Service of this Award.
(e) An employer shall not terminate the employment of an employee on the
grounds of the employee’s application for parental
leave, or absence on
parental leave, but otherwise the rights of the employer in respect of
termination of employment are not affected.
28. - LEAVE WITHOUT PAY
(1) Subject to the provisions of subclauses (2) and (3) of this clause, the
employer may grant an employee leave without pay for
any period and is
responsible for that employee on their return.
(2) Subject to the provisions of subclause (3) every application for leave
without pay will be considered on its merits and may be
granted provided that
the following conditions are met:
(a) The work of the Dental Health Services, is not inconvenienced; and
(b) All other leave credits of the employee are exhausted.
(3) An employee shall, upon request be entitled to two days unpaid personal
(caring) leave.
(4) An employee on a fixed term contract may not be granted leave without pay
for any period beyond that employee’s approved
period of engagement.
(5) Any period that exceeds two weeks during which an employee is on leave of
absence without pay shall not, for any purpose, be regarded
as part of the
period of service of that employee.
29. - STUDY ASSISTANCE
(1) (a) To ensure the maintenance of a trained public sector an employer may
provide an employee with paid study leave and/or financial
assistance for study
purposes in accordance with the provisions of this clause.
(b) Employees are not eligible for study assistance if they have previously
received study assistance for an approved course from
their employer. Further
study assistance towards additional qualifications may, however, be granted in
special cases, at the discretion
of the employer.
(2) Study Leave
(a) An employee may be granted time off with pay for study purposes at the
discretion of the employer.
(b) In every case the approval of time off to attend lectures and tutorials
will be subject to:
(i) agency convenience;
(ii) employees undertaking an acceptable formal study load in their own
(iii) employees making satisfactory progress with their studies;
(iv) the course being an approved course as defined by clause 29(4);
(v) the course being of value to the agency; and
(vi) the employer’s discretion when the course is only relevant to the
employee’s career in the service and being of value
to the State.
(c) Part-time employees are entitled to study leave on the same basis as full
time employees, with their entitlement calculated on
a pro rata basis.
Employees working shift work or on fixed term contracts have the same access to
study leave as all other employees.
(d) Time off with pay may be granted up to a maximum of five hours per week
including travelling time, where subjects of approved
courses are available
during normal working hours, or where approved study by correspondence is
undertaken.
(e) Employees who are obliged to attend educational institutions for
compulsory block sessions may be granted time off with pay, including
time, up to the maximum annual amount allowed in clause 29(2)(d).
(f) Where an employee is undertaking approved study via distance education
and/or is not required to attend formal classes, an employer
may allow the
employee to access study leave up to the maximum annual amount allowed in clause
(g) Employees shall be granted sufficient time off with pay to travel to and
sit for the examinations of any approved course of study.
(h) An acceptable part-time study load should be regarded as not less than
five hours per week of formal tuition with at least half
of the total formal
study commitment being undertaken in the employee’s own time, except in
special cases such as where the
employee is in the final year of study and
requires less time to complete the course, or the employee is undertaking the
recommended
part-time year or stage and this does not entail five hours formal
(i) In cases where employees are studying subjects which require fortnightly
classes the weekly study load should be calculated by
averaging over two weeks
the total fortnightly commitment.
(j) In workplaces which are operating on flexi-time, time spent attending or
travelling to or from formal classes for approved courses
between 8.15 am and
4.30 pm, less the usual lunch break, and for which “time off” would
usually be granted, is to be
counted as credit time for the purpose of
calculating total hours worked per week.
(k) Travelling time returning home after lectures or tutorials is to be
calculated as the excess time taken to travel home from such
classes, compared
with the time usually taken to travel home from the employee’s normal
place of work.
(l) An employee shall not be granted more than 5 hours’ time off with
pay per week except in exceptional circumstances where
the employer may decide
(m) Time off with pay for those who have failed a unit or units may be
considered for one repeat year only.
(n) An employee performing service with the Australian Defence Force is not
entitled to study leave for any period of service with
the Australian Defence
Force that they receive defence force reserves leave as provided for by clause
38 – Defence Force Reserves
(o) A service agreement or bond will not be required.
(3) Financial Assistance
(a) An employer may reimburse an employee for the full or any part of any
reasonable cost of enrolment fees, Higher Education Contribution
compulsory text books, compulsory computer software and other necessary study
materials for studies commenced during their
employment.
(b) Half of the value of the agreed costs shall be reimbursed immediately
following production of written evidence of enrolment and
costs incurred, and
the remaining half shall be reimbursed following production of written evidence
of successful completion of the
subject for which reimbursement has been
(c) The employer and employee may agree to alternative reimbursement
arrangements.
(4) Approved Courses for Study Purposes
(a) For the purposes of clauses 29(2) and (3), the following are approved
(i) Degree or associate diploma courses at a university within the
(ii) Degree or diploma courses at an authorised non-university institution;
(iii) Diploma courses provided by registered training organisations,
including TAFE;
(iv) Two-year full time certificate courses provided by registered training
organisations, including TAFE;
(v) Courses recognised by the National Authority for the Accreditation of
translators and Interpreters (NAATI) in a language relevant
to the needs of the
public sector; and
(vi) Secondary courses leading to the Tertiary Entrance Examination or
courses preparing students for the mature age entrance conducted
by the Tertiary
Institutions Service Centre.
(b) For the purposes of clause 29(4)(a):
(i) The term ‘university’ includes recognised Australian
universities and recognised overseas universities as defined
Education Act 2004
(ii) An authorised non-university institution is a non-university institution
that is authorised under the
Higher Education Act 2004
(WA) to provide a
higher education course; and
(iii) A registered training organisation is an organisation that is
registered with the Training Accreditation Council or equivalent
registering
authority and complies with the nationally agreed standards set out in the
Australian Quality Training Framework (AQTF).
(c) An employee who has completed a diploma through TAFE is eligible for
study assistance to undertake a degree course at a university
within Australia
or an authorised non-university institution.
(d) An employee who has completed a two year full time certificate through
TAFE is eligible for study assistance to undertake a diploma
course specified in
clause 29(4)(a)(iii) or a degree or diploma course specified in clauses
29(4)(a)(i) or (ii).
(5) Full Time Study
(a) Subject to the provisions of clause 29(5)(b), the employer may grant an
employee full time study leave with pay to undertake:
(i) post graduate degree studies at Australian or overseas tertiary education
institutions; or
(ii) study tours involving observations and/or investigations; or
(iii) a combination of postgraduate studies and study tour.
(b) Applications for full time study leave with pay are to be considered on
their merits and may be granted provided that the following
conditions are
(i) The course or a similar course is not available locally. Where the
course of study is available locally, applications are to
be considered in
accordance with the provisions of clauses 29(2) and (4) and clause 28 - Leave
without Pay.
(ii) It must be a highly specialised course with direct relevance to the
employee’s profession.
(iii) It must be highly relevant to the agency’s corporate strategies
(iv) The expertise or specialisation offered by the course of study should
not already be available through other employees employed
within the agency.
(v) If the applicant was previously granted study leave, studies must have
been successfully completed at that time. Where an employee
is still under a
bond, this does not preclude approval being granted to take further study leave
if all the necessary criteria are
(vi) A fixed term contract employee may not be granted study leave with pay
for any period beyond that employee’s approved period
of engagement.
(c) Full time study leave with pay may be approved for more than 12 months
subject to a yearly review of satisfactory performance.
(d) Where an outside award is granted and the studies to be undertaken are
considered highly desirable by an employer, financial assistance
to the extent
of the difference between the employee’s normal wage and the value of the
award may be considered. Where no
outside award is granted and where a request
meets all the necessary criteria then part or full payment of wage may be
approved at
the discretion of the employer.
(e) The employer supports recipients of coveted awards and fellowships by
providing study leave with pay. Recipients normally receive
as part of the
award or fellowship; return airfares, payment of fees, allowance for books,
accommodation or a contribution towards
accommodation.
(f) Where recipients are in receipt of a living allowance, this amount should
be deducted from the employee’s wage for that
(g) Where the employer approves full time study leave with pay the actual
wage contribution forms part of the agency’s approved
average staffing
level funding allocation. Employers should bear this in mind if considering
temporary relief.
(h) Where study leave with pay is approved and the employer also supports the
payment of transit costs and/or an accommodation allowance,
the employer will
gain approval for the transit and accommodation costs as required.
(i) Where employees travelling overseas at their own expense wish to
participate in a study tour or convention whilst on tour, study
leave with pay
may be approved by the employer together with some local transit and
accommodation expenses providing it meets the
requirements of clause 29(5)(b).
Each case is to be considered on its merits.
(j) The period of full time study leave with pay is accepted as qualifying
service for leave entitlements and other privileges and
conditions of service
prescribed for employees under the award.
30. - SHORT LEAVE
(1) The employer may, upon sufficient cause being shown, grant an employee
leave of absence not exceeding two consecutive working
days but any leave of
absence granted shall not exceed, in the aggregate, three working days in any
one (1) calendar year.
(2) An employee who desires short leave shall except in emergency situations,
make written application, in a form approved by the
employer for the purpose,
prior to the commencement of such leave.
(3) Short leave shall not be granted for sick leave purposes.
31. - BEREAVEMENT LEAVE
(1) Employees including casuals shall on the death of:
(a) the spouse or de-facto partner of the employee;
(b) the child, step-child or grandchild of the employee (including an adult
child, step-child or grandchild);
(c) the parent, step-parent or grandparent of the employee;
(d) the brother, sister, step brother or step sister; or
(e) any other person who, immediately before that person's death, lived with
the employee as a member of the employee's household;
be eligible for up to two (2) days paid bereavement leave, provided that at
the request of an employee the employer may exercise a
discretion to grant
bereavement leave to an employee in respect of some other person with whom the
employee has a special relationship.
(2) The two (2) days need not be consecutive.
(3) Bereavement leave is not to be taken during any other period of
(4) Payment of such leave may be subject to the employee providing evidence,
if so requested by the employer, of the death or relationship
to the deceased,
that would satisfy a reasonable person.
(5) An employee requiring more than two days bereavement leave in order to
travel overseas in the event of the death overseas of a
member of the employee's
immediate family may, upon providing adequate proof, in addition to any
bereavement leave to which the employee
is eligible, have immediate access to
annual leave and/or accrued long service leave or leave without pay provided all
accrued leave
is exhausted.
(6) Travelling time for Regional Employees
(a) Subject to prior approval from the employer, an employee entitled to
bereavement leave and who, as a result of such bereavement,
travels to a
location within Western Australia that is more than 240 km from their workplace
will be granted paid time off for the
travel period undertaken in the
employee’s ordinary working hours up to a maximum of 15 hours per
bereavement. The employer
will not unreasonably withhold approval.
(b) The employer may approve additional paid travel time within Western
Australia where the employee can demonstrate to the satisfaction
of the employer
that more than two days travel time is warranted.
(c) The provisions of clause 31(6) are not available to employees whilst on
leave without pay or sick leave without pay.
(d) The provisions of clauses 31(6)(a) and (b) apply as follows.
(i) An employee employed on a fixed term contract for a period greater than
12 months, shall be credited with the same entitlement
as a permanent
employee for each full year of service and pro rata for any residual portion of
employment.
(ii) An employee employed on a fixed term contract for a period less than 12
months shall be credited with the same entitlement on
a pro rata basis for the
period of employment.
(iii) A part time employee shall be entitled to the same entitlement as a
full time employee for the period of employment, but on
a pro rata basis
according to the number of ordinary hours worked each fortnight.
(iv) For casual employees, the provisions apply to the extent of their agreed
working arrangements.
32. - CULTURAL/CEREMONIAL LEAVE
(1) Cultural/ceremonial leave shall be available to all employees.
(2) Such leave shall include leave to meet the employee's customs,
traditional law and to participate in cultural and ceremonial activities.
(3) Employees are entitled to time off without loss of pay for
cultural/ceremonial purposes, subject to agreement between the employer
employee and sufficient leave credits being available.
(4) The employer will assess each application for ceremonial/cultural leave
on its merits and give consideration to the personal circumstances
employee seeking the leave.
(5) The employer may request reasonable evidence of the legitimate need for
the employee to be allowed time off.
(6) Cultural/ceremonial leave may be taken as whole or part days off. Each
day or part thereof, shall be deducted from:
(a) the employee’s annual leave entitlements;
(b) the employee’s accrued long service leave entitlements, but in full
(c) accrued days off or time in lieu; or
(d) short leave when entitlements under subclauses (a), (b) and (c) have been
fully exhausted.
(7) Time off without pay may be granted by arrangement between the employer
and the employee for cultural/ceremonial purposes.
33. - BLOOD/PLASMA DONORS LEAVE
(1) Subject to operational requirements, employees shall be entitled to
absent themselves from the workplace in order to donate blood
or plasma in
accordance with the following general conditions:
(a) prior arrangements with the employer have been made and at least two (2)
days' notice has been provided; or
(b) the employee is called upon by the Red Cross Blood
(2) The notification period shall be waived or reduced where the employer is
satisfied that operations would not be unduly affected
by the employee's
(3) The employee shall be required to provide proof of attendance at the Red
Cross Blood Centre upon return to work.
(4) Employees shall be entitled to two (2) hours of paid leave per donation
for the purpose of donating blood to the Red Cross Blood
34. - EMERGENCY SERVICE LEAVE
(1) Subject to operational requirements, paid leave of absence shall be
granted by the employer to an employee who is an active volunteer
State Emergency Service Units, St John Ambulance Brigade, Volunteer Fire and
Rescue Service Brigades, Bush Fire Brigades,
Volunteer Marine Rescue Services
Groups or Department of Fire and Emergency Service Units, in order to allow for
attendance at emergencies
as declared by the recognised authority.
(2) The employer shall be advised as soon as possible by the employee, the
emergency service, or other person as to the absence and,
where possible, the
expected duration of leave.
(3) The employee must complete a leave of absence form immediately upon
(4) The application form must be accompanied by a certificate from the
emergency organisation certifying that the employee was required
specified period.
(5) An employee, who during the course of an emergency, volunteers their
services to an emergency organisation, shall comply with
subclauses (2), (3) and
(4) of this clause.
35. - UNION FACILITIES FOR UNION
REPRESENTATIVES
(1) The employer recognises the rights of the union to organise and represent
its members. Union representatives in the agency have
a legitimate role and
function in assisting the union in the tasks of recruitment, organising,
communication and representing members'
interests in the workplace, agency and
union electorate.
(2) The employer recognises that, under the union's rules, union
representatives are members of an Electorate Delegates Committee
representing
members within a union electorate. A union electorate may cover more than one
(3) The employer will recognise union representatives in the agency and will
allow them to carry out their role and functions.
(4) The union will advise the employer in writing of the names of the union
representatives in the agency.
(5) The employer shall recognise the authorisation of each union
representative in the agency and shall provide them with the following:
(a) Paid time off from normal duties to perform their functions as a union
representative such as organising, recruiting, individual
grievance handling,
collective bargaining, involvement in the electorate delegates committee and to
attend union business in accordance
with Clause 36. - Leave to Attend
Association Business of this Award.
(b) Access to facilities required for the purpose of carrying out their
duties. Facilities may include but not be limited to, the
use of filing
cabinets, meeting rooms, telephones, fax, email, internet, photocopiers and
stationery. Such access to facilities
shall not unreasonably affect the
operation of the organisation and shall be in accordance with normal agency
(c) A noticeboard for the display of union materials including broadcast
email facilities.
(d) Paid access to periods of leave for the purpose of attending union
training courses in accordance with Clause 37. - Trade Union
Training Leave of
this Award. Country representatives will be provided with appropriate travel
(e) Notification of the commencement of new employees, and as part of their
induction, time to discuss the benefits of union membership
(f) Access to awards, agreements, policies and procedures.
(g) The names of any Equal Employment Opportunity and Occupational Health,
Safety and Welfare representatives.
(6) The employer recognises that it is paramount that union representatives
in the workplace are not threatened or disadvantaged in
any way as a result of
their role as a union representative.
36. - LEAVE TO ATTEND ASSOCIATION
(1) The employer shall grant paid leave at the ordinary rate of pay during
normal working hours to an employee:
(a) who is required to attend or give evidence before any Industrial
(b) who as a Union-nominated representative is required to attend any
negotiations and/or proceedings before an Industrial Tribunal
and/or meetings
with Ministers of the Crown, their staff or any other representative of
Government;
(c) when prior arrangement has been made between the Union and the employer
for the employee to attend official Union meetings preliminary
to negotiations
and/or Industrial Tribunal proceedings; and
(d) who as a Union-nominated representative is required to attend joint
union/management consultative committees or working parties.
(2) The granting of leave is subject to convenience and shall only be
(a) where reasonable notice is given for the application for leave;
(b) for the minimum period necessary to enable the union business to be
conducted or evidence to be given; and
(c) for those employees whose attendance is essential.
(3) The employer shall not be liable for any expenses associated with an
employee attending to union business.
(4) Leave of absence granted under this clause shall include any necessary
travelling time in normal working hours.
(5) An employee shall not be entitled to paid leave to attend to union
business other than as prescribed by this Clause.
(6) The provisions of the Clause shall not apply to:
(a) special arrangements made with the union which provide for unpaid leave
for employees to conduct union business;
(b) when an employee is absent from work without the approval of the
employer; and
(c) casual employees.
37. - TRADE UNION TRAINING LEAVE
(1) Subject to the employer's convenience and the provisions of this
(a) The employer shall grant paid leave of absence to employees who are
nominated by the Association to attend short courses relevant
to the public
sector or the role of union workplace representative, conducted by the Civil
Service Association.
(b) The employer shall grant paid leave of absence to attend similar courses
or seminars as from time to time approved by agreement
between the employer and
the Association.
(2) An employee shall be granted up to a maximum of five (5) days paid leave
per calendar year for trade union training or similar
courses or seminars as
approved. However, leave of absence in excess of five (5) days and
up to ten (10) days may be granted in any one calendar year provided that
the total leave being granted in that year and in the subsequent
year does not
exceed ten (10) days.
(3) (a) Leave of absence will be granted at the ordinary rate of pay and
shall not include shift allowances, penalty rates or overtime.
(b) Where a Public Holiday or rostered day off falls during the duration of a
course, a day off in lieu of that day will not be granted.
(c) Subject to paragraph (3)(a) of this clause, shift workers attending a
course shall be deemed to have worked the shifts they would
have worked had
leave not been taken to attend the course.
(d) Part-time employees shall receive the same entitlement as full time
employees, but payment shall only be made for those hours
that would normally
have been worked but for the leave.
(4) (a) Any application by an employee shall be submitted to the employer for
approval at least four weeks before the commencement
of the course unless the
employer agrees otherwise.
(b) All applications for leave shall be accompanied by a statement from the
union indicating that the employee has been nominated
for the course. The
application shall provide details as to the subject, commencement date, length
of course, venue and the authority,
which is conducting the course.
(5) A qualifying period of twelve months service shall be served before an
employee is eligible to attend courses or seminars of more
than a half-day
duration. The employer may, where special circumstances exist, approve an
application to attend a course or seminar
where an employee has less than twelve
months service.
(6) (a) The employer shall not be liable for any expenses associated with an
employee's attendance at trade union training courses.
(b) Leave of absence granted under this clause shall include any necessary
travelling time in normal working hours immediately before
or after the
38. - DEFENCE FORCE RESERVES LEAVE
(1) The employer must grant leave of absence for the purpose of Defence
service to an employee who is a volunteer member of the Defence
Force Reserves
or the Cadet Force. Defence service means service, including training, in a
part of the Reserves or Cadet Force.
(2) Leave of absence may be paid or unpaid in accordance with the provisions
of this clause.
(3) Application for leave of absence for Defence service shall, in all cases,
be accompanied by evidence of the necessity for attendance.
At the expiration
of the leave of absence granted, the employee shall provide a certificate of
attendance to the employer.
(4) Paid Leave
(a) An employee who is a volunteer member of the Defence Force Reserves or
the Cadet Force is entitled to paid leave of absence for
Defence service,
subject to the conditions set out hereunder.
(b) Part-time employees shall receive the same paid leave entitlement as
full-time employees, but payment shall only be made for those
hours that would
normally have been worked but for the leave.
(c) On written application, an employee shall be paid wage in advance when
proceeding on such leave.
(d) Casual employees are not entitled to paid leave for the purpose of
Defence service.
(e) An employee is entitled to paid leave for a period not exceeding 105
hours on full pay in any period of twelve months commencing
on 1 July in each
(f) An employee is entitled to a further period of leave, not exceeding 16
calendar days, in any period of twelve months commencing
on July 1. Pay for
this leave shall be at the rate of the difference between the normal
remuneration of the employee and the Defence
Force payments to which the
employee is entitled if such payments do not exceed normal wage. In calculating
the pay differential,
pay for Saturdays, Sundays, Public Holidays and rostered
days off is to be excluded, and no account is to be taken of the value of
board or lodging provided for the employee.
(5) Unpaid Leave
(a) Any leave for the purpose of Defence service that exceeds the paid
entitlement prescribed in subclause (4) of this clause shall
(b) Casual employees are entitled to unpaid leave for the purpose of Defence
(6) Use of Other Leave
(a) An employee may elect to use annual or long service leave credits for
some or all of their absence on Defence service, in which
case they will be
treated in all respects as if on normal paid leave.
(b) An employer cannot compel an employee to use annual leave or long service
leave for the purpose of Defence service.
39. - WITNESS AND JURY SERVICE
(1) An employee subpoenaed or called as a witness to give evidence in any
proceeding shall as soon as practicable notify the manager/supervisor
notify the employer.
(2) Where an employee is subpoenaed or called as a witness to give evidence
in an official capacity that employee shall be granted
by the employer leave of
absence with pay, but only for such period as is required to enable the employee
to carry out duties related
to being a witness. If the employee is on any form
of paid leave, the leave involved in being a witness will be reinstated, subject
to the satisfaction of the employer. The employee is not entitled to retain any
witness fee but shall pay all fees received into
the Consolidated Fund. The
receipt for such payment with a voucher showing the amount of fees received
shall be forwarded to the
(3) An employee subpoenaed or called as a witness to give evidence in an
official capacity shall, in the event of non-payment of the
proper witness fees
or travelling expenses as soon as practicable after the default, notify the
(4) An employee subpoenaed or called, as a witness on behalf of the Crown,
not in an official capacity shall be granted leave with
full pay entitlements.
If the employee is on any form of paid leave, this leave shall not be reinstated
as such witness service
is deemed to be part of the employee's civic duty. The
employee is not entitled to retain any witness fees but shall pay all fees
received into the Consolidated Fund.
(5) An employee subpoenaed or called as a witness under any other
circumstances other than specified in subclauses (2) and (4) of
this clause
shall be granted leave of absence without pay except when the employee makes an
application to clear accrued leave in
accordance with Award provisions.
(6) An employee required to serve on a jury shall as soon as practicable
after being summoned to serve, notify the supervisor/manager
who shall notify
the employer.
(7) An employee required to serve on a jury shall be granted by the employer
leave of absence on full pay, but only for such period
as is required to enable
the employee to carry out duties as a juror.
(8) An employee granted leave of absence on full pay as prescribed in
subclause 7 of this clause is not entitled to retain any juror's
fees but shall
pay all fees received into the Consolidated Fund. The receipt for such payment
shall be forwarded with a voucher
showing the amount of juror's fees received to
the employer.
40. - DISTURBANCE ALLOWANCE
(1) Where an employee is transferred and incurs expenses in the areas
referred to in subclause (2) of this clause as a result of that
transfer then
the employee shall be granted a disturbance allowance and shall be reimbursed by
the employer the actual expenditure
incurred upon production of receipts or such
other evidence as may be required.
(2) The disturbance allowance shall include -
(a) costs incurred for telephone installation at the employee's new residence
provided that the cost of telephone installation shall
be reimbursed only where
a telephone was installed at the employee's former residence including
Government owned accommodation;
(b) costs incurred with the connection or reconnection of services to the
employee's household including Government owned accommodation
for water, gas or
electricity;
(c) costs incurred with the redirection of mail to the employee's new
residence for a period of no more than three months.
41. - MOTOR VEHICLE ALLOWANCE
(1) For the purposes of this clause the following expressions shall have the
following meaning:
"A year" means 12 months commencing on the first day of July and ending on
the thirtieth day of June next following.
"Metropolitan area" means that area within a radius of 50 kilometres from the
Perth Railway Station.
"Southwest land division" means the South-west Division as defined by
Schedule 1,
Land Administration Act 1997
(WA) excluding the area
contained within the metropolitan area.
"Rest of the state" means that area south of 23.5 degrees south latitude,
excluding the metropolitan area and the southwest land division.
"Term of employment" means a requirement made known to the employee at the
time of applying for the position by way of publication
in the advertisement for
the position, written advice to the employee contained in the offer for the
position or oral communication
at interview by interviewing employee and such
requirement is accepted by the employee either in writing or orally.
"Qualifying service" shall include all service in positions where there is a
requirement as a term of employment to supply and maintain
a motor vehicle for
use on official business but shall exclude all absences which affect
entitlements as provided by this Award.
(2) (a) An employee who is required to supply and maintain a motor vehicle
for use when travelling on official business as a term
of employment shall be
reimbursed in accordance with the appropriate rates set out in Part I of
Schedule C – Motor Vehicle
Allowance of this Award for journeys travelled
on official business and approved by the employer or an authorised employee.
(b) An employee who is reimbursed under the provisions of subclause (2)(a) of
this clause will also be subject to the following conditions
(i) for the purposes of subclause (2)(a) of this clause an employee shall be
reimbursed with the appropriate rates set out in Part
1 of Schedule C –
Motor Vehicle Allowance of this Award for the distance travelled from the
employee's residence to the place
of duty and for the return distance travelled
from place of duty to residence except on a day where the employee travels
direct from
residence to headquarters and return and is not required to use the
vehicle on official business during the day;
(ii) where an employee in the course of a journey travels through two or more
separate areas, reimbursement shall be made at the appropriate
rate applicable
to each of the areas traversed as set out in Part 1 of Schedule C – Motor
Vehicle Allowance of this Award;
(iii) where an employee does not travel in excess of 4000 kilometres in a
year an allowance calculated by multiplying the appropriate
rate per kilometre
by the difference between the actual distance travelled and 4000 kilometres
shall be paid to the employee provided
that where the employee has less than 12
months' qualifying service in the year then the 4000 kilometre distance will be
on a pro rata basis and the allowance calculated accordingly;
(iv) where a part-time employee is eligible for a payment of an allowance
under subclause (2)(b)(iii) of this clause such allowance
shall be calculated on
the proportion of total hours worked in that year by the employee to the annual
standard hours had the employee
been employed on a full-time basis for the
(v) an employee who is required to supply and maintain a motor vehicle for
use on official business is excused from this obligation
in the event of his or
her vehicle being stolen, consumed by fire, or suffering a major and unforeseen
mechanical breakdown or accident,
in which case all entitlement to reimbursement
ceases while the employee is unable to provide the motor vehicle or a
replacement;
(vi) the employer may elect to waive the requirement that an employee supply
and maintain a motor vehicle for use on official business,
but three months'
written notice of the intention so to do shall be given to the employee
(3) (a) Subject to subclause (2) of this clause, an employee who is not
normally required to supply and maintain a motor vehicle as
a term of employment
and who is required to relieve an employee required to supply and maintain a
motor vehicle as a term of employment
shall be reimbursed all expenses incurred
in accordance with the appropriate rates set out in Part I of Schedule C–
Motor Vehicle
Allowance of this Award for all journeys travelled on official
business and approved by the employer where the employee is required
vehicle on official business whilst carrying out the relief duty.
(b) For the purposes of paragraph (a) of this subclause an employee shall be
reimbursed all expenses incurred in accordance with the
appropriate rates set
out in Part I of Schedule C – Motor Vehicle Allowance of this Award for
the distance travelled from the
employee's residence to place of duty and the
return distance travelled from the place of duty to residence except on a day
the employee travels direct from residence to headquarters and return and
is not required to use the vehicle on official business
during the day.
(c) Where an employee in the course of a journey travels through two or more
separate areas, reimbursement shall be made at the appropriate
rate applicable
to each of the areas traversed as set out in Part I of Schedule C – Motor
Vehicle Allowance of this Award.
(d) For the purpose of this subclause the allowance prescribed in subclause
(2)(b)(iii) and (iv) of this clause shall not apply.
(4) (a) An employee who is not required to supply and maintain a motor
vehicle for use when travelling on official business as a term
of employment,
but when requested by the employer voluntarily consents to use the vehicle shall
for journeys travelled on official
business approved by the employer be
reimbursed all expenses incurred in accordance with the appropriate rates set
out in Parts II
and III of Schedule C – Motor Vehicle Allowance of this
(b) For the purpose of paragraph (a) of this subclause an employee shall not
be entitled to reimbursement for any expenses incurred
in respect to the
distance between the employee's residence and headquarters and the return
distance from headquarters to residence.
(c) Where an employee in the course of a journey travels through two or more
separate areas, reimbursement shall be made at the appropriate
rate applicable
to each of the areas traversed as set out in Part II of Schedule C – Motor
Vehicle Allowance of this Award
if applicable.
(5) Allowance for towing employer’s caravan or trailer.
In cases where employees are required to tow the employer’s caravans on
official business, the additional rate shall be 8.0
cents per kilometre. When
the employer’s trailers are towed on official business the additional rate
shall be 4.0 cents per
42. - PROPERTY ALLOWANCE
(1) In this clause the following expressions shall have the following
"Agent" means a person carrying on business as an estate agent in a State or
Territory of the Commonwealth, being, in a case where
the law of that State or
Territory provides for the registration or licensing of persons who carry on
such a business, a person duly
registered or licensed under that law.
"Dependant" in relation to an employee means:
(a) spouse including de facto partner;
(b) child/children; or
(c) other dependant family;
who resides with the employee and who relies on the employee for support.
"Expenses" in relation to an employee means all costs incurred by the
employee in the following areas -
(a) legal fees paid to a solicitor, or in lieu thereof fees charged by a
settlement agent, for professional costs incurred in respect
of the sale or
purchase, the maximum fee to be claimed shall be as set out in the Solicitors
Cost Determination for non -contentious
business matters made under section 275
Legal Profession Act 2008
(b) disbursements duly paid to a solicitor or a settlement agent necessarily
incurred in respect of the sale or purchase of the residence;
(c) real estate agent's commission in accordance with that fixed by the Real
Estate and Business Agents Supervisory Board, acting
under Section 61 of the
Real Estate and Business Agents Act 1978
(WA), duly paid to an agent for
services rendered in the course of and incidental to the sale of the property,
the maximum fee to
be claimed shall be fifty percent (50%) as set out under
Items 1 or 2 - Sales by Private Treaty or Items 1 or 2 - Sales by Auction
Maximum Remuneration Notice;
(d) stamp duty;
(e) fees paid to the Registrar of Titles or to the employee performing duties
of a like nature and for the same purpose in another
State of the
Commonwealth;
(f) expenses relating to the execution or discharge of a first mortgage;
(g) the amount of expenses reasonably incurred by the employee in advertising
the residence for sale.
"Locality" in relation to an employee means -
(a) within the metropolitan area, that area within a radius of 50 kilometres
from the Perth City Railway Station, and
(b) outside the metropolitan area, that area within a radius of 50 kilometres
from an employee's headquarters when they are situated
outside of the
metropolitan area.
"Property" shall mean a "residence" as defined in this clause, including a
block of land purchased for the purpose of erecting a residence
thereon to the
extent that it represents a normal urban block of land for the particular
"Residence" includes any accommodation of a kind commonly known as a flat or
a home unit that is, or is intended to be, a separate
tenement, including
dwelling/house, and the surrounding land, exclusive of any other commercial
property, as would represent a normal
urban block of land for the particular
"Settlement agent" means a person carrying on business as settlement agent in
a State or Territory of the Commonwealth, being, in
a case where the law of that
State or Territory provides for the registration or licensing of persons who
carry on such a business,
a person duly registered or licensed under that
“Transfer” or “Transferred” means a permanent
transfer or permanently transferred.
(2) When an employee is transferred from one locality to another in the
public interest or in the ordinary course of promotion or
transfer, or on
account of illness due to causes over which the employee has no control, the
employee shall be entitled to be paid
a property allowance for reimbursement of
expenses incurred -
(a) In the sale of a residence in the employee's former locality, which, at
the date on which the employee received notice of transfer
to a new locality
(i) the employee owned and occupied; or
(ii) the employee was purchasing under a contract of sale providing for
vacant possession; or
(iii) the employee was constructing for the employee's own permanent
occupation, on completion of construction and
(b) In the purchase of residence or land for the purpose of erecting a
residence thereon for the employee's own permanent occupation
(3) An employee shall be reimbursed such following expenses as are incurred
in relation to the sale of a residence:
(a) if the employee engaged an agent to sell the residence on the employee's
behalf - 50% of the amount of the commission paid to
the agent in respect of the
sale of the residence;
(b) if the employee engaged a solicitor to act in connection with the sale of
the residence - the amount of the professional costs
and disbursements
necessarily incurred and paid to the solicitor in respect of the sale of the
(c) if the land on which the residence is created was subject to a first
mortgage and that mortgage was discharged on the sale, then
an employee shall,
if, in a case where a solicitor acted for the mortgagee in respect of the
discharge of the mortgage and the employee
is required to pay the amount of the
professional costs and disbursements necessarily incurred by the mortgagee in
respect of the
discharge of the mortgage - the amount so paid by the
(d) if the employee did not engage an agent to sell the residence on the
employee's behalf - the amount of the expenses reasonably
incurred by the
employee in advertising the residence for sale.
(4) An employee shall be reimbursed such following expenses as are incurred
in relation to the purchase of a residence:-
(a) if the employee engaged a solicitor or settlement agent to act in
connection with the purchase of the residence - the amount of
the professional
costs and disbursements necessarily incurred and paid to the solicitor or
settlement agent in respect of the purchase
of the residence;
(b) if the employee mortgaged the land on which the residence was erected in
conjunction with the purchase of the residence, then
an employee shall, if, in a
case where a solicitor acted for the mortgagee and the employee is required to
pay and has paid the amount
of the professional costs and disbursements
(including valuation fees but not a procuration fee payable in connection with
the mortgage)
necessarily incurred by the mortgagee in respect of the mortgage -
the amount so paid by the employee;
(c) if the employee did not engage a solicitor or settlement agent to act for
him/her in connection with the purchase or such a mortgage
- the amount of the
expenses reasonably incurred by the employee in connection with the purchase or
the mortgage, as the case may
be other than a procuration fee paid by the
employee in connection with the mortgage.
(5) An employee is not entitled to be paid a property allowance under
subclause (2)(b) unless the employee is entitled to be paid
a property allowance
under subclause (2)(a), provided that the employer may approve the payment of a
property allowance under subclause
(2)(b) to an employee who is not entitled to
be paid a property allowance under subclause (2)(a) if the employer is satisfied
it was necessary for the employee to purchase a residence or land for the
purpose of erecting a residence thereon in the new locality
because of the
employee's transfer from the former locality.
(6) For the purpose of this clause it is immaterial that the ownership, sale
or purchase carried out on behalf of an employee who
owns solely, jointly or in
common with:-
(a) the employee's spouse, or
(b) a dependant relative, or
(c) the employee's spouse and a dependant relative.
(7) Where an employee sells or purchases a residence jointly or in common
with another person - not being a person referred to in
subclause (6) of this
clause - the employee shall be paid only the proportion of the expenses for
which the employee is responsible.
(8) An application by an employee for a property allowance shall be
accompanied by evidence of the payment by the employee of the
expenses, being
evidence that is satisfactory to the employer.
(9) Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, an employee is not entitled to
the payment of a property allowance -
(a) in respect of a sale or purchase prescribed in subclause (1) of this
clause which is effected -
(i) more than 12 months after the date on which the employee took up duty in
a new locality; or
(ii) after the date on which the employee received notification of the
transfer back to the former locality;
provided that the employer may, in exceptional circumstances grant an
extension of time for such period as is deemed reasonable.
(b) Where the employee is transferred from one locality to another solely at
the employee's own request or on account of misconduct.
(10) Where there is a dispute or disagreement concerning -
(a) the necessity to purchase a residence or land;
(b) the amount of the disbursements necessarily incurred and duly paid by the
(c) the amount of expenses reasonably incurred by an employee when -
(i) the employee did not engage an agent to sell the residence on behalf of
the employee, or
(ii) the employee did not engage a solicitor or settlement agent to act in
connection with the purchase or a mortgage, the matter
shall be referred to the
Public Service Arbitrator.
43. - PROTECTIVE CLOTHING ALLOWANCE
An employee engaged on work which requires the provision of protective
clothing shall be:
(a) provided with the requisite protective clothing, with the laundering
costs for such protective clothing being at the expense of
the employer; or
(b) provided with an annual allowance, as agreed between the association and
the employer, which shall incorporate the cost of purchase
and laundry of the
requisite protective clothing.
Provided that nothing contained in this clause shall affect the
obligations of the employer to provide clothing pursuant to the
Occupational
Safety and Health Act 1984
44. - RELIEVING ALLOWANCE
(1) An employee who is required to take up duty away from headquarters on
relief duty or to perform special duty, and necessarily
resides temporarily away
from the employee's usual place of residence, shall be reimbursed reasonable
expenses on the following basis:-
(a) Where the employee is:-
(i) supplied with accommodation and meals free of charge, or
(ii) accommodated at a Government institution, hostel or similar
establishment and supplied with meals, reimbursement shall be in
accordance with
the rates prescribed in Column A, Items 1, 2 or 3 of Schedule E –
Travelling, Transfer and Relieving Allowance
of this Award.
(b) Where the employee is fully responsible for accommodation, meals and
incidental expenses and hotel or motel accommodation is utilised:-
(i) For the first 42 days after arrival at the new locality reimbursement
shall be in accordance with the rates prescribed in Column
A, Items 4 to 8 of
Schedule E – Travelling, Transfer and Relieving Allowance of this
(ii) For periods in excess of 42 days after arrival in the new locality
reimbursement shall be in accordance with the rates prescribed
in Column B,
Items 4 to 8 of Schedule E – Travelling, Transfer and Relieving Allowance
of this Award for employees with dependants
or Column C, Items 4 to 8 of
Schedule E – Travelling, Transfer and Relieving Allowance of this Award
for employees without
dependants: Provided that the period of reimbursement
under this subclause shall not exceed forty nine days without the approval
the employer.
(c) Where the employee is fully responsible for accommodation, meals and
incidental expenses and other than hotel or motel accommodation
is utilised
reimbursement shall be in accordance with the rates prescribed in Column A,
Items 9, 10 or 11 of Schedule E – Travelling,
Transfer and Relieving
Allowance of this Award.
(2) Reimbursement of expenses shall not be suspended should an employee
become ill whilst on relief duty, provided leave for the period
of such illness
is approved in accordance with the provisions of Clause 25. - Sick Leave of this
Award and the employee continues
to incur accommodation, meal and incidental
(3) When an employee, who is required to relieve or perform special duties in
accordance with subclause (1) of this clause is authorised
by the employer to
travel to the new locality in the employee's own motor vehicle such employee
shall be reimbursed for the return
journey as follows:-
(a) An employee who is required to supply and maintain a motor vehicle as a
term of employment for the period of relieving or special
duties shall be
reimbursed the appropriate rate prescribed by subclause (2) of Clause 41. -
Motor Vehicle Allowance of this Award
for the distance necessarily
(b) Where the employee will not be required to maintain a motor vehicle for
the performance of the relieving or special duties reimbursement
shall be on the
basis of one half of the appropriate rate prescribed by subclause (4) of Clause
41. - Motor Vehicle Allowance of
this Award. Provided that the maximum amount
of reimbursement shall not exceed the cost of the fare by public conveyance
which otherwise
would be utilised for such return journey.
(4) Where it can be shown by the production of receipts or other evidence
that an allowance payable under this clause would be insufficient
reasonable additional costs incurred, an appropriate rate of reimbursement shall
be determined by the employer.
(5) The provisions of Clause 47. - Travelling Allowance of this Award shall
not operate concurrently with the provisions of this clause
to permit an
employee to be paid allowances in respect of both travelling and relieving
expenses for the same period: Provided that
where an employee is required to
travel on official business which involves an overnight stay away from the
employee's temporary
headquarters the employer may extend the periods specified
in paragraph (b) of subclause (1) of this clause by the time spent in
travelling.
(6) An employee who is directed to relieve another employee or to perform
special duty away from the employee's usual headquarters
and is not required to
reside temporarily away from the employee's usual place of residence shall, if
the employee is not in receipt
of a higher duties or special allowance for such
work, be reimbursed the amount of additional fares paid in travelling by public
transport to and from the place of temporary duty.
45. - REMOVAL ALLOWANCE
(1) When an employee is transferred in the public interest, or in the
ordinary course of promotion or transfer, or on account of illness
due to causes
over which the employee has no control, the employee shall be reimbursed
(a) The actual reasonable cost of conveyance of the employee and
dependants.
(b) The actual cost (including insurance) of the conveyance of an employee's
household furniture effects and appliances up to a maximum
volume of 45 cubic
metres provided that a larger volume may be approved by the employer in special
(c) An allowance of $572.00 for accelerated depreciation and extra wear and
tear on furniture, effects and appliances for each occasion
that an employee is
required to transport their furniture, effects and appliances provided that the
employer is satisfied that the
value of household furniture, effects and
appliances moved by the employee is at least $3,429.00.
(d) Reimbursement of reasonable expenses in kennelling and transporting of
domestic pet or pets up to a maximum amount of $184.00.
Pets are defined as dogs, cats, birds or other domestic animals kept by the
employee or the employee's dependants for the purpose
of household
Pets do not include domesticated livestock, native animals or equine
(2) An employee who is transferred solely at their own request or on account
of misconduct must bear the whole cost of removal unless
otherwise determined by
the employer prior to removal.
(3) An employee shall be reimbursed the full freight charges necessarily
incurred in respect of the removal of the employee's motor
vehicle. If
authorised by the employer to travel to a new locality in the employee's own
motor vehicle, reimbursement shall be as
(a) Where the employee will be required to maintain a motor vehicle for use
on official business at the new headquarters, reimbursement
for the distance
necessarily travelled shall be on the basis of the appropriate rate prescribed
by clause 41(2) - Motor Vehicle Allowance.
(b) Where the employee will not be required to maintain a motor vehicle for
use on official business at the new headquarters reimbursement
for the distance
necessarily travelled shall be on the basis of one half (½) of the
appropriate rate prescribed by subclause
clause 41(3) - Motor Vehicle
(c) Where an employee or their dependants have more than one vehicle, and all
the vehicles are to be relocated to the new residence,
the cost of transporting
or driving up to two vehicles shall be deemed to be part of the removal
(d) Where only one vehicle is to be relocated to the new residence, the
employee may choose to transport a trailer, boat or caravan
in lieu of the
second vehicle. The employee may be required to show evidence of ownership of
the trailer, boat or caravan to be
transported.
(e) If the employee tows the caravan, trailer or boat to the new residence,
the additional rate per kilometre is to be 3.5 cents per
kilometre for a caravan
or boat and 2.0 cents per kilometre for a trailer.
(4) The employee shall, before removal is undertaken obtain quotes from at
least two carriers which shall be submitted to the employer,
who may authorise
the acceptance of the more suitable: Provided that payment for a volume amount
beyond 45 cubic metres shall not
occur without the prior written approval of the
(5) The employer may, in lieu of conveyance, authorise payment to compensate
for any loss in any case where an employee, with prior
approval of the employer,
disposes of their household furniture effects and appliances instead of removing
them to the new headquarters:
Provided that such payments shall not exceed the
sum which would have been paid if the employee's household furniture effects and
appliances had been removed by the cheapest method of transport available and
the volume was 45 cubic metres.
(6) Where an employee is transferred to government owned or private rental
accommodation, where furniture is provided, and as a consequence
the employee is
obliged to store furniture, the employee shall be reimbursed the actual cost of
such storage up to a maximum allowance
of $1,065.00 per annum. Actual cost is
deemed to include the premium for adequate insurance coverage for the value of
the furniture
stored. An allowance under this subclause shall not be paid for a
period in excess of four years without the approval of the employer.
(7) Receipts must be produced for all sums claimed.
(8) New appointees to the public service shall be entitled to receive the
benefits of this clause if they are required by the employer
to participate in
any training course prior to being posted to their respective positions in the
service. This entitlement shall
only be available to employees who have
completed their training and who incur costs when moving to their first
(9) An employer may agree to provide removal assistance greater than
specified in this award and if in that event that the employee
to whom the
benefit is granted elects to leave the position, on a permanent basis, within
twelve months, the employer may require
the employee to repay the additional
removal assistance on a pro rata basis. Repayment can be deducted from any
monies due to the
(10) For the purposes of clause 45(9), “elects to leave the
position,” means the employee freely chooses to leave the
position in the
ordinary course of promotion, transfer or resignation and this necessitates the
employer obtaining a replacement
46. - TRANSFER ALLOWANCE
(1) Subject to subclauses (2) and (5) of this clause, an employee who is
transferred to a new locality in the public interest, or
in the ordinary course
of promotion or transfer, or on account of illness due to causes over which the
employee has no control, shall
be paid at the rates prescribed in Column A,
Items 4, 5 or 6 of Schedule E– Travelling, Transfer and Relieving
Allowance of
this Award for a period of 14 days after arrival at new
headquarters within Western Australia or Column A, Items 7 and 8 of Schedule
Travelling, Transfer and Relieving Allowance of this Award for a period of 21
days after arrival at new headquarters in another
State of Australia. Provided
that if an employee is required to travel on official business during the said
periods, such period
will be extended by the time spent in travelling. Under no
circumstances, however, shall the provisions of this subclause operate
concurrently with those of Clause 47- Travelling Allowance of this Award to
permit an employee to be paid allowances in respect of
both travelling and
transfer expenses for the same period.
(2) Prior to the payment of an allowance specified in subclause (1), the
employer shall:
(a) require the employee to certify that permanent accommodation has not been
arranged or is not available from the date of transfer.
In the event that
permanent accommodation is to be immediately available, no allowance is payable;
(b) require the employee to advise the employer that should permanent
accommodation be arranged or become available within the prescribed
periods, the employee shall refund a pro rata
amount of the allowance for that period the occupancy in permanent
accommodation takes place prior to the completion of the prescribed
Provided also that should an occupancy date which falls within the specified
allowance periods be notified to the employer prior to
the employee's transfer,
the payment of a pro rata amount of the allowance should be made in lieu of the
full amount.
(3) If an employee is unable to obtain reasonable accommodation for the
transfer of the employee's home within the prescribed period
referred to in
subclause (1) of this clause and the employer is satisfied that the employee has
taken all possible steps to secure
reasonable accommodation, such employee
shall, after the expiration of the prescribed period to be paid in accordance
with the rates
prescribed by Column B, Items 4, 5, 6, 7 or 8 of Schedule E
– Travelling, Transfer and Relieving Allowance of this Award as
may require, until such time as reasonable accommodation has been secured:
Provided that the period of reimbursement under
this subclause shall not exceed
77 days without approval of the employer.
(4) When it can be shown by the production of receipts or other evidence that
an allowance payable under this clause would be insufficient
to meet reasonable
additional costs incurred by an employee on transfer, an appropriate rate of
reimbursement shall be determined
by the employer.
(5) An employee who is transferred to Government owned accommodation shall
not be entitled to reimbursement under this clause: Provided
(a) where entry into the Government owned accommodation is delayed through
circumstances beyond the employee's control an employee
may, subject to the
production of receipts, be reimbursed actual reasonable accommodation and meal
expenses for the employee and
dependants less a deduction for normal living
expenses prescribed in Column A, Items 15 and 16 of Schedule E –
Travelling,
Transfer and Relieving Allowance of this Award; and provided
(b) if any costs are incurred under subclause (2) of Clause 40. - Disturbance
Allowance of this Award they shall be reimbursed by
the employer.
47. - TRAVELLING ALLOWANCE
An employee who travels on official business shall be reimbursed reasonable
expenses on the following basis:
(1) When a trip necessitates an overnight stay away from headquarters and the
(a) is supplied with accommodation and meals free of charge; or
(b) attends a course, conference, etc., where the fee paid includes
accommodation and meals; or
(c) travels by rail and is provided with a sleeping berth and meals; or
(d) is accommodated at a Government institution, hostel or similar
establishment and supplied with meals;
reimbursement shall be in accordance with the rates prescribed in Column A,
Items 1, 2 or 3 of Schedule E - Travelling, Transfer and
Relieving Allowance of
this Award.
(2) When a trip necessitates an overnight stay away from the employee's
headquarters and the employee is fully responsible for the
provision of
accommodation, meals and incidental expenses:
(a) where hotel or motel accommodation is utilised reimbursement shall be in
accordance with the rates prescribed in Column A, Items
4 to 8 of Schedule E -
Travelling, Transfer and Relieving Allowance of this Award;
(b) where other than hotel or motel accommodation is utilised reimbursement
shall be in accordance with rates prescribed in Column
A, Items 9, 10 or 11 of
Schedule E – Travelling, Transfer and Relieving Allowance of this
(3) When a trip necessitates an overnight stay away from headquarters and
accommodation only is provided at no charge to the employee,
reimbursement shall
be made in accordance with the rates prescribed in Column A, Items 1, 2 or 3 and
Items 12, 13 or 14 of Schedule
E – Travelling, Transfer and Relieving
Allowance of this Award subject to the employees' certification that each meal
was actually purchased.
(4) To calculate reimbursement under subclauses (1) and (2) for a part of a
day, the following formula shall apply-
(a) If departure from headquarters is:
before 8.00am - 100% of the daily rate.
8.00am or later but prior to 1.00pm - 90% of the daily rate.
1.00pm or later but prior to 6.00pm - 75% of the daily rate.
6.00pm or later - 50% of the daily rate.
(b) If arrival back at headquarters is:
8.00am or later but prior to 1.00pm - 10% of the daily rate.
1.00pm or later but prior to 6.00pm - 25% of the daily rate.
6.00pm or later but prior to 11.00pm - 50% of the daily rate.
11.00pm or later - 100% of the daily rate.
(5) When an employee travels to a place outside a radius of 50 kilometres
measured from the employee's headquarters, and the trip
does not involve an
overnight stay away from headquarters, reimbursement for all meals claimed shall
be at the rates set out in Column
A, Items 12 or 13 of Schedule E –
Travelling, Transfer and Relieving Allowance of this Award subject to the
employee's certification
that each meal claimed was actually purchased.
Provided that when an employee departs from headquarters before 8.00am and does
arrive back at headquarters until after 11.00pm on the same day
reimbursement shall be at the appropriate rate prescribed in Column
to 8 of Schedule E – Travelling, Transfer and Relieving Allowance of this
(6) When it can be shown to the satisfaction of the employer by the
production of receipts that reimbursement in accordance with Schedule
Travelling, Transfer and Relieving Allowance of this Award does not cover an
employee's reasonable expenses for a whole
trip the employee shall be reimbursed
the excess expenditure.
(7) In addition to the rates contained in Schedule E – Travelling,
Transfer and Relieving Allowance of this Award an employee
shall be reimbursed
reasonable incidental expenses such as train, bus and taxi fares, official
telephone calls, laundry and dry cleaning
expenses, on production of
(8) If, on account of lack of suitable transport facilities, an employee
necessarily engages reasonable accommodation for the night
prior to commencing
travelling on early morning transport the employee shall be reimbursed the
actual cost of such accommodation.
(9) Reimbursement of expenses shall not be suspended should an employee
become ill whilst travelling, provided leave for the period
of such illness is
approved in accordance with the provisions of this Award and the employee
continues to incur accommodation, meal
and incidental expenses.
(10) Reimbursement claims for travelling in excess of 14 days in one month
shall not be passed for payment by a certifying employee
unless the employer has
endorsed the account.
(11) An employee who is relieving at or temporarily transferred to any place
within a radius of 50 kilometres measured from the employees
headquarters shall
not be reimbursed the cost of midday meals purchased, but an employee travelling
on duty within that area which
requires absence from the employees headquarters
over the usual midday meal period shall be paid at the rate prescribed by Item
of Schedule E - Travelling, Transfer and Relieving Allowance of this Award
for each meal necessarily purchased, provided that:
(a) such travelling is not a normal feature in the performance of the
employee's duties;
(b) such travelling is not within the suburb in which the employee resides;
(c) total reimbursement under this subclause for any pay period shall not
exceed the amount prescribed by Item 18 of Schedule E –
Travelling,
Transfer and Relieving Allowance of this Award.
48. - WEEKEND ABSENCE FROM RESIDENCE
(1) An employee who is temporarily absent from normal headquarters on
relieving duty or travelling on official business outside a
radius of 320
kilometres measured from normal headquarters, and is necessarily absent from his
or her residence and separated from
dependants, shall be granted an additional
day's leave for every group of three consecutive weekends so absent provided
weekend shall be counted as a member of only one group. Provided
(a) the relief duty or travelling on official business is within Australia
and the employee is not directed to work on the weekend
by the employer;
(b) an additional day's leave shall not be allowed if the employer has
approved the employee's family accompanying the employee during
the period of
relief or travelling;
(c) additional leave under this subclause shall be commenced within one month
of the period of relief duty or travelling being completed
unless the employer
approves otherwise;
(d) the annual leave loading provided by subclause (12) of Clause 22. -
Annual Leave of this Award shall not apply to any leave entitlement
(2) An employee who is temporarily absent from normal headquarters on
relieving duty or travelling on official business outside a
radius of 320 and up
to 400 kilometres measured from normal headquarters, may elect to have the
benefit of concessions provided by
subclause (3) of this clause in lieu of those
provided by subclause (1). Kalgoorlie, Albany and Geraldton shall be regarded
within a radius of 400 kilometres for the purposes of this subclause in
the case of an employee resident in the metropolitan area.
(3) An employee who is temporarily absent from normal headquarters on
relieving duty or travelling on official business within a radius
kilometres measured from normal headquarters, and such relief duty or travel
would normally necessitate the employee being
absent from the employee's
residence for a weekend, shall be allowed to return to the residence for the
weekend. Provided that:
(a) an employee who is directed to work on a weekend by the employer shall
not be entitled to the concessions provided by this subclause;
(b) all travelling to and from the employee's residence shall be undertaken
outside of the hours of duty prescribed by Clause 19.
- Hours of this Award;
(c) an employee, who has obtained the approval of the employer for the family
to accompany the employee during the period of relief
or travelling shall not be
entitled to the concessions provided by this subclause;
(d) when an employee is authorised by the employer to use the employee's own
motor vehicle to travel to the locality where the relief
duty is being performed
or when travelling on official business the employee shall be reimbursed on the
basis of one half of the
appropriate rate prescribed by subclause (4) of Clause
41. - Motor Vehicle Allowance of this Award, for the journey to the employee's
residence for the weekend and the return to the place of relief duty. Provided
that the maximum amount of reimbursement shall not
exceed the cost of the rail
or bus fare by public conveyance which otherwise would be utilised for such
journey and payment shall
be made only to the owner of such vehicle;
(e) when an employee has been authorised by the employer to use the
employer's motor vehicle in connection with the relief duty or
travelling on
official business, the employee shall be allowed to use that vehicle for the
purpose of returning to the employee's
residence for the weekend;
(f) an employee who does not use a private motor vehicle or the employer's
motor vehicle as provided by paragraphs (d) and (e) of
this subclause, shall be
reimbursed the cost of the fare by public conveyance by road or rail for the
journey, to and from the employee's
residence for the weekend;
(g) an employee who does not make use of the provisions of this subclause
shall be paid travelling allowance or relieving allowance
as the case may
require in accordance with the provisions of Clause 47. - Travelling Allowance
of this Award or Clause 44. - Relieving
Allowance of this Award;
(h) employees who return to their residence for the weekend in accordance
with the provisions of this subclause shall not be entitled
to the reimbursement
of any expenses allowed by Clause 44. - Relieving Allowance and Clause 47. -
Travelling Allowance of this Award
during the period from the time when the
employee returns to the employee's other residence to the time of departing from
such residence
to travel to resume duty at the place away from the
49. - PRESERVATION OF RIGHTS
As a result of this Award, nothing herein contained shall in itself operate
so as to detrimentally alter the conditions of employment
or wage that is the
minimum prescribed in this Award or any benefit superior to any contained
50. - KEEPING OF AND ACCESS TO EMPLOYMENT
Employers must ensure that the keeping of employment records and access to
employment records of employees is in accordance with
Industrial Relations
(WA) Part II
Division 2F Keeping of and access to employment
. If the employer maintains a personal or other file on an employee
subject to the employer's convenience, the employee shall be
entitled to examine
all material maintained on that file.
51. - NOTIFICATION OF CHANGE
(1) (a) Where an employer has made a definite decision to introduce major
changes in production, programme, organisation, structure
or technology that are
likely to have significant effects on employees, the employer shall notify the
employees who may be affected
by the proposed changes and the Association.
(b) For the purpose of this clause "significant effects" include termination
of employment; major changes in the composition, operation
or size of the
employer's workforce or in the skills required; elimination or diminution of job
opportunities, promotion opportunities
or job tenure; the alteration of hours of
work; the need for retraining or transfer of employees to other work or
locations and restructuring
Provided that where this Award or any other Award or Agreement makes
provision for alteration of any of the matters referred to in
this clause an
alteration shall be deemed not to have significant effect.
(2) (a) The employer shall discuss with the employees affected and the
Association, inter alia, the introduction of the changes referred
subclause (1) of this clause, the effects the changes are likely to have on
employees, measures to avert or mitigate the adverse
effects of such changes on
employees and shall give prompt consideration to matters raised by the employees
and/or the Association
in relation to the changes.
(b) The discussion shall commence as early as practicable after a firm
decision has been made by the employer to make the changes
referred to in
subclause (1) of this clause, unless by prior arrangement, the Association is
represented on the body formulating
recommendations for change to be considered
by the employer.
(c) For the purposes of such discussion an employer shall provide to the
employees concerned and the Association all relevant information
changes including the nature of the changes proposed, the expected effects of
the changes on employees and any other matters
likely to affect employees.
Provided that any employer shall not be required to disclose confidential
information, the disclosure
of which would be inimical to the employer's
52. - RIGHT OF ENTRY AND INSPECTION BY AUTHORISED
REPRESENTATIVES
The parties shall act consistently with the terms of the Division 2 G - Right
of Entry and
Inspection by Authorised Representatives
Industrial Relations Act 1979
An authorised representative
shall on notification to the employer have the right to enter any premises where
relevant employees covered
by this award work during working hours, including
meal breaks, for the purpose of holding discussions at the premises with
employees covered by the award who wish to participate in those
discussions, the legitimate business of the Association or for the
investigating complaints concerning the application of this Award, but shall in
no way unduly interfere with the work
of employees.
53. - COPIES OF AWARD
Every employee shall be entitled to have access to a copy of this Award.
Sufficient copies shall be made available by the employer
for this purpose and
shall be located in each of the employer's premises.
54. - ACCESS TO INFORMATON AND RESOURCES
(1) The parties recognise that information technology resources have major
implications for industrial and human resource functions
(2) The employer recognises the need to provide appropriate information to
all employees, so it is accessible in the workplace in
either electronic or hard
copy format.
(3) Where the employer utilises information technology as the means of
communicating to employees, the employer must ensure that where
employees do not
have access to technology, then alternative methods of providing this
information will be used.
(4) The information includes, but is not limited to policies and practice
guidelines, human resource manuals, awards and agreements,
internal agency news
bulletins and updates and job opportunities.
55. - ESTABLISHMENT OF CONSULTATIVE
The parties to this Award are required to establish a consultative
mechanism/s and procedures appropriate to their size, structure
and needs, for
consultation and negotiation on matters affecting the efficiency and
productivity of the Dental Health Service.
56. – DISPUTE SETTLEMENT PROCEDURE
(1) Any questions, difficulties or disputes arising under this Award of
employees bound by the award shall be dealt with in accordance
with this clause.
(2) The employee/s and the manager with whom the dispute has arisen shall
discuss the matter and attempt to find a satisfactory solution,
within three (3)
working days.
(3) If the dispute cannot be resolved at this level, the matter shall be
referred to and be discussed with the relevant manager's
supervisor and an
attempt made to find a satisfactory solution, within a further three (3) working
(4) If the dispute is still not resolved, it may be referred by the
employee/s or Association representative to the employer or his
(5) Where the dispute cannot be resolved with five (5) working days of the
Association representatives' referral of the dispute to
the employer or his or
her nominee, either party may refer the matter to the Western Australian
Industrial Relations Commission.
(6) The period for resolving a dispute may be extended by agreement between
the parties.
(7) At all stages of the procedure the employee may be accompanied by an
Association representative.
SCHEDULE A – RESPONDENT EMPLOYER
The Employer party to and bound by this Award is the North Metropolitan
Health Service.
SCHEDULE B - WAGES
(1) The weekly wage applicable to employees covered by this Award.
Registration
Apprentice Dental Technician Year 1
Apprentice Dental Technician Year 2
Apprentice Dental Technician Year 3
Apprentice Dental Technician Year 4
Adult Apprentice Dental Technician (21 years and over)Years 1, 2 and
Adult Apprentice Dental Technician (21 years and over) Year 4
Dental Technician Year 1
Dental Technician Year 2
Dental Technician Year 3
Dental Technician Year 4
Dental Technician Advanced Level 1 Year 1
Dental Technician Advanced Level 1 Year 2
Dental Technician Advanced Level 1 Year 3
Dental Technician Advanced Level 1 Year 4
Dental Technician Advanced Level 2 Year 1
Dental Technician Advanced Level 2 Year 2
Dental Technician Advanced Level 2 Year 3
Dental Technician Advanced Level 2 Year 4
SCHEDULE C - MOTOR VEHICLE ALLOWANCE
Part 1 - Motor Car
Area Details
Rate (cents) per kilometre
Engine Displacement (in cubic centimetres)
Over 2600cc
Over 1600cc to 2600cc
1600cc and under
Metropolitan Area
First 4000 kilometres
Over 4000 up to 8000 kms
Over 8000 up to 16000 kms
Over 16000 kms
South West Land Division
First 4000 kilometres
Over 4000 up to 8000 kms
Over 8000 up to 16000 kms
Over 16000 kms
North of 23.5º South Latitude
First 4000 kilometres
Over 4000 up to 8000 kms
Over 8000 up to 16000 kms
Over 16000 kilometres
Rest of State
First 4000 kilometres
Over 4000 up to 8000 kms
Over 8000 up to 16000 kms
Over 16000 kilometres
Part 2 - Motor Car
Area Details
Rate (cents) per kilometre
Engine Displacement (in cubic centimetres)
Over 2600cc
Over 1600cc to 2600cc
1600cc and under
Metropolitan Area
South West Land Division
North of 23.5o South Latitude
Rest of the State
Part 3 - Motor Cycle
Rate - Cents per kilometre
Part 4 – Motor Vehicle Allowance Zone Maps
SCHEDULE D - CLAUSE 21. - OVERTIME ALLOWANCE
PART 1 - OUT OF HOURS CONTACT
$ 8.90 per hour
$ 4.45 per hour
Availability
$ 2.22 per hour
PART 2 - MEALS
$10.80 per meal
$13.30 per meal
Evening Meal
$15.95 per meal
SCHEDULE E - TRAVELLING, TRANSFER AND RELIEVING
PARTICULARS
DAILY RATE EMPLOYEES WITH DEPENDENTS RELIEVING ALLOWANCE FOR
PERIOD IN EXCESS OF 42 DAYS (CLAUSE 44 (1)(b) (ii)) TRANSFER ALLOWANCE
PERIOD IN EXCESS OF PRESCRIBED PERIOD (CLAUSE 46(3))
DAILY RATE EMPLOYEES WITHOUT DEPENDENTS RELIEVING ALLOWANCE
FOR PERIOD IN EXCESS OF 42 DAYS (CLAUSE 44 (1)(b) (ii))
ALLOWANCE TO MEET INCIDENTAL EXPENSES
WA - South of 26°
South Latitude
WA - North of 26°
South Latitude
ACCOMMODATION INVOLVING AN OVERNIGHT STAY IN A HOTEL OR MOTEL
WA - Metropolitan
Hotel or Motel
Locality South of 26°
South Latitude
Locality North of 26°
South Latitude
Fitzroy Crossing
Gascoyne Junction
Halls Creek
Pannawonica
Port Hedland
Turkey Creek
Interstate - Capital City
Other Capitals
Interstate - Other
than Capital City
ACCOMMODATION INVOLVING AN OVERNIGHT STAY AT OTHER THAN A HOTEL OR
WA - South of 26° South Latitude
WA - North of 26° South Latitude
TRAVEL NOT INVOLVING AN OVERNIGHT STAY OR TRAVEL INVOLVING AN OVERNIGHT
STAY WHERE ACCOMODATION ONLY IS PROVIDED.
WA - South of 26° South Latitude:
WA - North of 26° South Latitude
DEDUCTION FOR NORMAL LIVING EXPENSES (Clause 52. Transfer Allowance)
MIDDAY MEAL (Clause 53. Travelling Allowance)
Rate per meal
Maximum reimbursement per pay period
SCHEDULE F - SHIFT WORK ALLOWANCE
An employee required to work a weekday afternoon or night shift of 7.6
hours worked, will in addition to the ordinary rate of salary,
allowance of $21.93 is payable for each afternoon or night shift of 7.6 hours
SCHEDULE G - NAMED UNION PARTY
The Civil Service Association of Western Australia Incorporated.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter