URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WAIRC/2025/58.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:04:35
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Kerensa Leanne McGrane -v- Sarah Jane Anderson as the trustee for the Ruby Bay Trust, trading as Ruby Bay Catering [2025] WAIRC 58; (7 February 2025)
UNFAIR DISMISSAL
APPLICATION
WESTERN AUSTRALIAN INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COMMISSION
COMMISSIONER C TSANG
ON THE PAPERS
DELIVERED :
7 FEBRUARY 2025
U 47 OF 2024
KERENSA LEANNE MCGRANE
SARAH JANE ANDERSON AS THE TRUSTEE
FOR THE RUBY BAY TRUST, TRADING AS RUBY BAY CATERING
Law (WA) – Whether Commission has jurisdiction over unfair dismissal claim
– Whether applicant employed as
a casual employee
Legislation
Industrial Relations Act 1979
objection upheld; Application dismissed
Representation:
Ms K L McGrane (on her own behalf)
Ms S J Anderson (on her own behalf)
Cases referred to in reasons:
Balagopalan v South Metropolitan Health Service
[2022] WAIRC 00692
Construction, Forestry, Maritime, Mining and Energy Union v Personnel
Contracting Pty Ltd
[2022] HCA 1
EFEX Group Pty Ltd v Bennett
[2024] FCAFC 35
WorkPac Pty Ltd v Rossato
[2021] HCA 23
Reasons for Decision
17 May 2024, the applicant (
Unfair Dismissal Application
) against her former employer,
the respondent (
Ms Anderson
), claiming unfair dismissal
from her position as Canteen Assistant on 19 April 2024.
24 July 2024, Ms Anderson filed a
Form 2A – Employer Response to Unfair
Dismissal Application
, raising a jurisdictional objection that Ms McGrane is
not eligible to make a claim of unfair dismissal as she was employed as a
26 September 2024, Directions ([2024] WAIRC 00854) were issued for the
and for the
parties to file affidavits, sworn or affirmed in accordance with
Oaths, Affidavits and Statutory Declarations Act 2005
testifying to the matters that they sought to rely upon in support of, or
objecting to, the Jurisdictional
Commission can only hear an unfair dismissal claim if there has been a
is no dismissal when the employment relationship between a casual employee and
their employer ends in accordance with the terms
of the contract and industrial
agreement at the end of each period of engagement:
Balagopalan v South
Metropolitan Health Service
[2022] WAIRC 00692
Balagopalan
) [52], [54]–[57]:
the statements of the High Court in [
Contracting
referred to above, the answer to this question must be
sought in the terms of the legally enforceable instruments which determine
parties’ respective rights and obligations rather than in their subsequent
conduct or performance of the contract. ...
relevantly, the employment contract indicates in several ways that the casual
employment was in the nature of several and distinct
engagements rather than
ongoing employment. It refers to ‘any period of casual work’,
‘possible placements’,
‘at the time of any and each casual
arrangement’ and ‘any employment periods’.
the contract expressly states that any employment periods are governed by the
Industrial Agreement. I have set out the relevant
terms of the Industrial
Agreement above. The nature of casual employment under the Industrial Agreement
is such that there is no
scope to understand casual employment as being in
the nature of ongoing or continuous employment. Each engagement must be for a
of less than one week. As SMHS points out, the very nature of casual
employment, as defined by the Industrial Agreement, is that
it cannot be
said to be continuing or to support a subsisting relationship outside the
periods of work themselves.
accept SMHS’s submission that the Industrial Agreement operates on the
underlying principle that each occasion of casual employment,
even if only one
shift, is a separate, freestanding contract of employment such that the
employment relationship ends at the end
of a shift.
practical consequence of the nature of the casual employment is that Mr
Balagopalan was not entitled to be engaged for future
shifts and was not in an
ongoing employment relationship with SMHS. If he was precluded from accessing
further shifts from 16 February
2022, or indeed any later point, it is not a
dismissal at law. The employment relationship between him and SMHS ceased
pursuant to
the terms of the contract and the Industrial Agreement at the
conclusion of each separate period of engagement.
Balagopalan
, the Commission applied the High Court’s
principles from
WorkPac Pty Ltd v Rossato
[2021] HCA 23 (
Construction, Forestry,
Maritime, Mining and Energy Union v Personnel Contracting Pty Ltd
Personnel Contracting
) to find that rostering
arrangements are not a relevant factor in determining the nature of casual
employment. Instead, the focus
is on the written employment contract, which,
along with the terms of the industrial agreement, explicitly disavows the notion
Mr Balagopalan’s casual employment is akin to ongoing or
continuous employment.
, the High Court ruled that employment is not considered
casual if there is a ‘firm advance commitment’ to ongoing work.
The Court clarified that any irregularity, uncertainty, discontinuity,
intermittency or unpredictability, indicates no such commitment.
emphasised that the determination of a firm advance commitment must be based on
the agreement between the parties, rather
than their expectations or
understandings in the performance of the agreement: [49], [57], [89], [96]
(Kiefel CJ, Keane, Gordon,
Edelman, Steward and Gleeson JJ).
, despite Mr Rossato being rostered up to a year in advance
to work regular, full-time hours according to a fixed pattern of work,
Court concluded that there was no firm advance commitment to ongoing work:
[95]–‍[96] (Kiefel CJ, Keane, Gordon,
Edelman, Steward and Gleeson
High Court found that the parties’ express agreement to pay Mr Rossato a
casual loading in lieu of entitlements available
to ongoing employees, such as
paid annual leave, was a compelling indication that their relationship did
not include a commitment
for an ongoing working relationship: [97] (Kiefel CJ,
Keane, Gordon, Edelman, Steward and Gleeson JJ).
Personnel Contracting
, the High Court emphasised that the nature
of an employment relationship is determined by the terms of the contract,
not by the practical
performance of that contract: [59]–‍[62]
(Kiefel CJ, Keane and Edelman JJ); [185]–‍[189] (Gordon J,
J agreeing at [203]).
majority of the Full Court of the Federal Court in
EFEX Group Pty Ltd v
[2024] FCAFC 35
) outlined the
applicable principles where there is no written employment contract:
[7]–‍[11] (Katzmann and Bromwich JJ):
case did not involve any written contract at all, much less a comprehensive
written contract. It was a wholly oral contract,
with sparse details of the
agreement reached expressed in the lead up to its formation. In the absence of a
written contract and
no evidence of a particular conversation during which the
contract was made, “evidence of the parties’ conduct must
necessarily
be considered in order to draw inferences as to whether the meeting
of minds necessary to create a contract has occurred and what
obligations they
have thereby undertaken”:
Personnel Contracting
at [177] per
Gordon J (Steward J agreeing), as summarised in
v Silk Contract Logistics
[2023] FCA 1047
Kennett J explained in
at [8]–[9], where there
is no written contract, the identification of the parties’ contractual
rights “must proceed
somewhat differently but the fundamental task is the
same: the parties’ contractual rights and obligations are to be
ascertained
and characterised”; and the focus is on the ascertainment of
the legal rights and obligations of the contracting parties, “rather
how they behaved in the performance of their contract”.
terms of an oral contract may be able to be inferred from the circumstances,
including in whole or in part from the parties’
conduct or a course of
dealing between them, or implied where necessary for business efficacy:
Realestate.com.au Pty Ltd v Hardingham
[2022] HCA 39
–[22] per Kiefel CJ and Gageler J.
whether the [contract] is written or not, or is oral in whole or in part, the
characterisation of the relationship between the
parties depends on their
contractual rights and not on circumstances, facts or events that do not affect
those rights. It follows
that a “wide-ranging review of the entire history
of the parties’ dealings” is neither necessary nor appropriate
the purpose of characterising the relationship:
Contracting
at [59] per Kiefel CJ, Keane and Edelman JJ; see also
[185]–[189] per Gordon J (Steward J agreeing).
principles of contract interpretation also apply to the terms of an unwritten
contract that are able to be ascertained, inferred
or implied. They allow regard
to be had to circumstances surrounding the making of the contract and events and
matters, known to
the parties at the time of contracting, which assist in
identifying the object or purpose of the contract. The nature of the work
contracted for and the arrangements of the supply or provision of any tools or
equipment to the putative employee may also be relevant.
Generally, things said
or done after a contract was made are not legitimate aids to its construction.
In a case such as this, for
a matter with no necessary connection to the
contractual obligations of the parties to have any bearing on the
characterisation of
their relationship, “it must be concerned with the
rights and duties established by the parties’ contract, and not simply
aspect of how the parties’ relationship has come to play out in
Personnel Contracting
at [61] (Kiefel CJ,
Keane and Edelman JJ).
The evidence
24 October 2024 and 19 December 2024, Ms McGrane filed affidavits,
(a) On Friday, 23 February 2024, she was interviewed for
the position of canteen assistant by Ms Anderson. During this interview:
(i) Ms Anderson said her permanent work shifts would be on Fridays of each
school term to fill the gap in the weekly roster, after
someone else had
(ii) Ms Anderson also mentioned the opportunity to cover shifts for other
staff when needed, and scope for additional permanent shifts
if they became
(iii) Ms Anderson did not mention that she was being employed on a casual
(iv) The only mention about the ‘award’ was $30 an hour and
superannuation.
(b) During her employment (27 February 2024 to 19 April 2024):
(i) She worked a consistent work pattern of Fridays of each week, except for
the Good Friday public holiday and school holiday Fridays.
(ii) She worked all shifts allocated to her, including permanent shifts on
Fridays, shifts to cover other staff members ‘on
multiple occasions’
when asked, and a catering shift early in her employment.
(iii) She did not receive a written employment contract or a position
description.
(iv) She discovered she was a casual employee when she saw it written on her
21 November 2024 and 16 January 2025, Ms Anderson filed affidavits,
(a) She has operated school canteens since July 2021 and
has employed a total of 22 staff. All staff have been employed as casuals
the same award and written employment contracts as each other. She has never
employed anyone in any capacity other than as
a casual, due to the nature of her
(b) On Wednesday, 21 February 2024, Ms McGrane contacted her via Messenger,
stating that she was looking for work. At the time, there
was no position
advertised. However, she agreed to meet with Ms McGrane because she was wanting
someone who could help ‘cover
some shifts’.
(c) On Friday, 23 February 2024, she interviewed Ms McGrane for a casual
canteen assistant position. During this interview, she explained
McGrane the nature of the role, and told Ms McGrane what her rate of pay
would be and that this rate included the casual loading
under the relevant
(d) At no time during the interview, or at any time afterwards, did she offer
Ms McGrane a permanent position.
(e) Ms McGrane started work on Tuesday, [27] February 2024. She was absent
from site on this day as she was receiving medical treatment.
However, Ms
McGrane was treated and trained in the same way as every other staff member.
(f) Ms McGrane received her first pay on Wednesday, 6 March 2024,
and was emailed her payslip, which listed her pay rate and that
casual. At no time did Ms McGrane question her casual status or indicate that
she thought that she was actually a permanent
(g) Between Tuesday, [27] February 2024 and Friday, 19 April 2024, Ms McGrane
worked a variety of shifts, on a variety of days, covering
(h) Ms McGrane was part of the ‘Canteen Chat 2024’ Messenger
group, where all staff could swap shifts, add shifts to
cover others, and state
when they were unavailable for work, as is the nature of casual
employment.
(i) Ms McGrane’s payroll records show that:
(i) She was paid a casual loading in her weekly pay as per the award.
(ii) She did not work a consistent work pattern.
(iii) She was not paid for any day that she did not work, as per the
conditions of a casual employee.
(iv) There were three weeks that Ms McGrane did not work. Two of these weeks
were during school holidays, and the other week was when
Ms McGrane was not
required. In these three weeks, Ms McGrane was not paid any holiday pay, as this
was included in her hourly rate
as a casual employee.
(j) She has never suggested verbally or in writing that Ms McGrane was
employed other than as a casual.
(k) She never made a firm advance commitment as to the duration of
Ms McGrane’s employment or the days or hours that Ms McGrane
Anderson also filed four affidavits of former and current staff members, in
which they state that they previously were, or currently
(a) Employed as a canteen assistant.
(b) Employed as a casual, and to the best of their knowledge, all canteen
staff are employed as casuals.
(c) Part of the Messenger group ‘Canteen Chat 2024’ where they
could add, swap, or change shifts with other staff, and
that Ms McGrane was also
a part of this group.
Consideration
the evidence, it is not disputed that:
(a) Ms Anderson is in the
business of operating school canteens and employing canteen assistants.
All other canteen assistants, due
to the nature of her business, have been
or are currently employed on a casual basis, under the same award and pursuant
to a written
employment contract in the same terms: [
(a)–‍(b)] above.
(b) Ms McGrane contacted Ms Anderson for work. Ms Anderson had not advertised
to employ a canteen assistant but agreed to interview
Ms McGrane because she was
wanting someone to help ‘cover’ the shifts of the canteen
assistants: [
(b)] above.
(c) Ms Anderson interviewed Ms McGrane on Friday, 23 February 2024 for a
canteen assistant position: [
(c)] above.
(d) During the interview, Ms Anderson explained to Ms McGrane the nature of
the position: [
(c)] above.
This included ‘filling a gap’ in the weekly roster, following
the resignation of another canteen assistant,
by working Fridays during the
school term: [
(a)‍(i)] above.
Ms Anderson also informed Ms McGrane that she had the opportunity to cover
the shifts of other canteen assistants
and to work additional shifts as they
became available: [
(e) Ms Anderson employed Ms McGrane following the interview, and Ms McGrane
commenced employment on Tuesday, 27 February 2024: [
(e)] above.
(f) Ms McGrane was employed from Tuesday, 27 February 2024 to Friday, 19
April 2024. During this period, Ms McGrane worked Fridays
during the school
(b)‍(i)] above.
She also covered the shifts of other canteen assistants and worked a
catering shift: [
[13(g)] above.
(g) The business has a Messenger group, titled ‘Canteen Chat
2024’, in which canteen assistants can swap shifts, add shifts
others, and indicate when they are unavailable for work. Ms McGrane was part of
this Messenger group: [
(c)] above.
(h) Ms Anderson issued Ms McGrane with weekly payslips, the first of which
was dated Wednesday, 6 March 2024: [
(f)] above.
(i) Ms Anderson attached to her first affidavit the payslips issued to Ms
McGrane. These indicate the following:
(i) Pay Frequency: Weekly.
(ii) Position: Casual Canteen Staff.
(iii) Pay Rate: $30 per hour.
(iv) Superannuation is paid in addition to the Pay Rate.
(v) Ms McGrane worked the following hours:
Week ending
Payment Date
Hours worked
3 March 2024
6 March 2024
10 March 2024
13 March 2024
17 March 2024
20 March 2024
24 March 2024
27 March 2024
31 March 2024
3 April 2024
7 April 2024
10 April 2024
14 April 2024
17 April 2024
21 April 2024
24 April 2024
16.25 hours
(j) Ms McGrane discovered that she was a casual employee from her payslip:
(b)‍(iv)] above.
At no time did Ms McGrane query her casual status with
Ms Anderson: [
(f)] above.
(k) Ms Anderson did not issue Ms McGrane a written employment contract: [
(b)‍(iii)] above.
Personnel Contracting
Balagopalan
, the nature of Ms McGrane’s employment
relationship is determined by the terms of her contract of employment.
(k)] above, and applying
, it is necessary to first consider whether there is
‘evidence of a particular conversation during which the contract was
outlined at [
(e)] above, there is no dispute that Ms
Anderson interviewed Ms McGrane for a canteen assistant position on Friday,
23 February 2024,
following which Ms Anderson employed Ms McGrane.
the evidence, there appears to be a dispute about what was said at the
interview. Ms McGrane says that Ms Anderson did not inform
her that she was
being employed on a casual basis: [
(a)‍(iii)] above. Ms Anderson says
that she informed Ms McGrane that her rate of pay included the casual loading
under the award:
(c)] above. Ms
McGrane says that the only mention Ms Anderson made about the award was
that she would be paid an hourly rate of $30
per hour plus
superannuation: [
McGrane says that during the interview, Ms Anderson informed her that her
‘permanent work shifts’ would be Fridays
during the school
(a)‍(i)] above. Ms
Anderson says that neither at the interview, nor afterwards, did she offer to
employ Ms McGrane in any capacity
other than as a casual employee: [
(d)] above. Ms Anderson says that she
has never suggested to Ms McGrane, whether verbally or in writing, that Ms
McGrane was employed
in any capacity other than as a casual: [
(j)] above. Ms Anderson further says
that she made no firm advance commitment to Ms McGrane regarding the
duration of Ms McGrane’s
employment, or the days or hours that
Ms McGrane would work: [
circumstances where there is no written employment contract and no evidence of a
particular conversation during which the contract
was made, the terms of the
contract may be inferred from the circumstances, including in whole or in
part from the parties’
conduct or a course of dealing between them, or
implied where necessary for business efficacy:
Furthermore,
regard may be had to the circumstances surrounding the making of the contract
and events and matters known to the parties
at the time of contracting, which
assist in identifying the object or purpose of the contract. The nature of the
work contracted
for may also be relevant:
to the consideration of the matters at [
] above, are the matters outlined at [
(a)–‍(d)] above.
Considering
the matters at [
above, and despite the matters at [
] above, I find that the terms of Ms
McGrane’s employment provided that her employment was on a casual basis,
for the following
is no evidence that Ms Anderson raised any topics at the interview that could
suggest Ms McGrane’s employment was to be
ongoing, such as an
entitlement to annual leave or personal leave.
the contrary, and as outlined at [
‍(d)] above, I find that Ms
Anderson expressly discussed the nature of the canteen assistant position with
Ms McGrane at the
interview, including the variability in her work. I find this
variability akin to the irregularity, uncertainty, discontinuity, intermittency
or unpredictability discussed in
] above), as indicating a lack of a firm
advance commitment to ongoing work.
Anderson does not admit or deny informing Ms McGrane that her
‘permanent work shifts’ would be Fridays during the school
Given the variability of work that was offered (as outlined at [
‍(d)] and discussed at [
] above), I consider it more likely that
had Ms Anderson used the word
, that it was a reference to
working a Friday shift, as opposed to Ms McGrane
being employed on a permanent basis to work each Friday. However, given that the
High Court in
found that a firm advance commitment to
ongoing work does not exist, even with a work roster set a year in advance to
work regular,
full-time hours according to a fixed pattern of work, I do not
consider it necessary to make any findings on this point.
circumstances where Ms Anderson’s business was the operation of school
canteens and for the duration of this business she
has only employed canteen
assistants on a casual basis, the surrounding circumstances, the
parties’ conduct and business efficacy
would infer or imply into the
oral contract between Ms Anderson and Ms McGrane that Ms Anderson was offering
to employ McGrane on
a casual basis.
is not disputed that Ms Anderson employs all other canteen assistants under the
same award that governed Ms McGrane’s employment.
It is also not disputed
that Ms Anderson entered into a written employment contract with all other
canteen assistants which states
their casual status.
the directions hearing, Ms Anderson explained the reasons why she did not issue
Ms McGrane with a written employment contract:
... So during
the time that this was all happening, I was actually not there the day that she
started because I was undergoing treatment
unfortunately, there are a whole number of things that occurred the day that she
started and the week that she started where
I said I would get her paperwork
through to her. I also had my laptop stolen from my car, and I can prove that
through police records.
So I had – where – as well as health concerns and treatment
concerns, I was also dealing with the fact that my laptop
was gone, so I, from
memory, thought that she had actually signed it and it was available, and now in
hindsight, I can see that she
hasn’t actually got a signed copy of it, and
I don’t have a signed copy of it in – in my records ...
accept the matters at [
] above and
that Ms Anderson’s personal circumstances at the time Ms McGrane
commenced employment, led to Ms Anderson’s
oversight in issuing to
Ms McGrane a written employment contract.
accept that had Ms Anderson issued to Ms McGrane a written employment
contract, that it would have been identical to the contracts
issued to her other
staff; and stated Ms McGrane’s employment status as a casual.
note that the written employment contract that Ms Anderson issues to all other
staff members contain the following terms:
Letter of engagement
I am pleased to offer you casual employment in the position of Canteen
Assistant with us at Ruby Bay Catering (‘the employer’)
on the terms
and conditions set out in this letter.
employment will be on a casual basis, as required.
1.2 Each occasion that you work will be a separate contract of employment
which ceases at the end of that engagement.
1.3 As a casual employee, there is no guarantee of ongoing or regular
1.4 The duties of this role are in the
position description.
On each occasion that you work you will be required to perform these duties and
any other duties the employer
may assign to you, having regard to your
skills, training and experience.
Remuneration
will be paid at the rate of $30.00 per hour, including the applicable casual
find that the terms of Ms McGrane’s employment provided for her to be paid
$30 per hour plus superannuation. I find that this
rate included the casual
loading that Ms McGrane was entitled to receive as a casual employee.
is undisputed that the terms of Ms McGrane’s employment were governed by
an industrial award, as a matter of law.
Anderson attached to her second affidavit the rates of pay as at 1 July 2023
Restaurant, Tearoom and Catering Workers’ Award
12 of the Award states:
PART-TIME EMPLOYEES
(1) A part-time worker shall mean a
worker who, subject to the provisions of Clause 8. - Hours, regularly works no
less than twenty
ordinary hours per fortnight nor less than three hours per work
(2) A part-time worker shall receive payment for wages, annual leave,
holidays, bereavement leave, and sick leave on a pro-rata basis
in the same
proportion as the number of hours worked each fortnight bears to seventy-six
(3) Notwithstanding any other provision of this award, the employer and the
worker may, by agreement, increase the ordinary hours
to be worked in any
particular pay period to a maximum of seventy-six ordinary hours. Such extra
hours shall be paid for at ordinary
rates of pay.
12(1) of the Award defines a part-time worker as one who regularly works no less
than 20 ordinary hours per fortnight. Given
there is no evidence that Ms McGrane
was offered to work, nor indeed worked, a minimum of 20 hours a fortnight, I
find that Ms McGrane
was not employed as a part-time employee under the
11 of the Award states:
CASUAL EMPLOYEES
(1) A casual employee shall mean an
employee engaged and paid as such and whose employment may be terminated by
either the employer
or the employee giving not less than 1 hours notice or the
payment or forfeiture, as the case requires, of 1 hours pay.
(2) A casual employee shall not be engaged for less than 2 consecutive hours
each shift.
(3) A casual employee shall be paid only an hourly base rate of pay that is
an amount not less than 1/76th of the fortnightly rate
prescribed in Clause 21.
- Wages Rates for the relevant classification for any work performed.
(4) In addition to the hourly base rate of pay prescribed in subclause (3)
of this clause, a casual employee shall also be paid the
following loading
DAY % PENALTY RATE
Monday to Friday 25
Saturday & Sunday 50
Public Holiday 125
(5) Where a shift commences on one day and ceases on the following day, for
each hour worked on that shift the employee shall be
paid at the rate applying
to the day on which that hour of work is actually performed.
(6) A casual employee is to be informed, before they are engaged, that they
are employed on a casual basis and that there is no entitlement
to paid sick
leave or annual leave.
find that Ms McGrane was employed as a casual employee under the Award, despite
her dispute that Ms Anderson did not inform her
of her casual status before
she was engaged, as required by clause 11(6) of the Award.
find that the nature of casual employment under the Award is such that there is
no scope to view Ms McGrane’s casual employment
as ongoing or continuous
employment.
the preceding reasons, I find that Ms McGrane was employed as a casual employee,
and that her employment ended in accordance with
her casual employment.
the Commission lacks jurisdiction over Ms McGrane’s unfair dismissal
application.
Consequently,
application U 47 of 2024 will be dismissed.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (175 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter