URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WAIRC/2025/159.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:04:30
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Commission's Own Motion -v- (Not Applicable) [2025] WAIRC 159; (12 March 2025)
REVIEW OF THE CATERING EMPLOYEES
AND TEA ATTENDANTS (GOVERNMENT) AWARD 1982 PURSUANT TO
RELATIONS ACT 1979
WESTERN AUSTRALIAN INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COMMISSION
SENIOR COMMISSIONER R
TUESDAY, 11 MARCH 2025
DELIVERED :
WEDNESDAY, 12 MARCH 2025
COMMISSION'S OWN MOTION
(NOT APPLICABLE)
Law (WA) – Commission’s own motion –
Section 40B(1)
Industrial Relations Act 1979
(WA) – Award variation – Catering
Employees and Tea Attendants (Government) Award – To ensure award does not
wages that are less than statutory minimum wages – Removal of
obsolete, out of date and discriminatory provisions – Variations
award facilitates efficient organisation and performance of work balanced with
fairness – Award varied
Legislation
Equal Opportunity Act 1984
Fair Work Act 2009
Industrial Arbitration Act 1979
Industrial Relations Legislation Amendment and Repeal Act 1995
Labour Relations Reform Act 2002
Industrial Relations Act 1979
Minimum Conditions of Employment Act 1993
Public and Bank Holidays Act 1972
Public Sector Management Act 1994
Award varied
Representation
Ms C Fuentes Beltran and Ms A Dyer on behalf of the named employer
respondents to the Award
Ms E Orman on behalf of the United Workers Union
Case(s) referred to in reasons:
Commission’s Own Motion v
(Not Applicable)
[2024] WAIRC 00013
Reasons for Decision
Western Australian Industrial Relations
of its own motion,
initiated this matter for variation of the
Catering Employees and Tea
Attendants (Government)
Relations Act 1979
). Section 40B allows the Commission
to vary an award for any one or more of the following purposes:
(a) to ensure that the award does not contain wages that are less
than the minimum award wage as ordered by the Commission under s
(b) to ensure that the award does not contain
conditions of employment that are less favourable than those provided by the
Minimum Conditions of Employment Act 1993
(c) to ensure that the award does not contain provisions that discriminate
against an employee on any ground on which discrimination
in work is unlawful
Equal Opportunity Act 1984
(d) to ensure that the award does not contain provisions that are obsolete or
need updating; and
(e) to ensure that the award is consistent with the facilitation of the
efficient organisation and performance of work according to
the needs of an
industry and enterprises within it, balanced with fairness to the employees in
the industry and enterprises.
of the Award’s provisions were outdated or obsolete, or were less
favourable than the MCE Act.
Commission provided notice of its intention to vary the Award to UnionsWA, the
Chamber of Commerce and Industry WA, the Australian
Resources and Energy
Employers Association, the Minister for Industrial Relations, the public sector
employer parties to the Award
and the United Workers
(WA) as the
union party to the Award.
Commission then sought input from interested parties about the issues with the
Award, and the appropriate revisions to address
them. The Government Sector
Labour Relations Division of the
of Energy, Mines, Industry
Regulation and Safety represented the employers who are parties to the
and the Union participated in a conference convened by the
Commission to work through variations to the Award. The Department and
reached a consensus in relation to the proposed variations.
publication of the notice of proposed variations to the Award, pursuant to s
40B(2) of the IR Act, a hearing was convened
on 11 March 2025 for the purpose of
affording interested persons an opportunity to be heard in relation to those
proposed variations.
Department and the Union both confirmed the parties’ support for the
proposed variations with some minor further variations
for accuracy and to align
with the most recent amendments to the MCE Act.
Accordingly
I have determined that it is appropriate to vary the Award in accordance with
the Schedule to these reasons.
the following paragraphs, I set out briefly the rationale for the variations
contained in the Schedule.
Clause 1 – Title
year of the Award has been removed from its title consistent with contemporary
Clause 2 – Arrangement
clauses have been grouped together under functional headings in a standard
arrangements clause.
Clause 4 – Scope
Industrial Arbitration Act 1979
has been corrected to refer to the
Industrial Relations Act 1979
Cross-referencing to other
clauses has been corrected and updated.
Clause 5 – Term
clause is deleted as it is obsolete. The term expired in 1982.
Clause 6 – Definitions
clause is renumbered to clause 5.
definition of Catering Establishment has been expanded by the addition of
canteens and restaurants.
definitions of ‘Casual Employee’ and ‘part time
employee’ previously contained elsewhere in the Award
have been moved to
the definitions clause 6.
reference to ‘Her Majesty’s Armed Forces’ has been changed to
‘the Armed Forces’.
definition of ‘Cashier’ has been amended by substituting
‘receiving payment’ for ‘receiving monies’.
definitions are re-ordered in alphabetical order.
– Contract of Employment
clause is renumbered to clause 6.
concerning termination of employment have been separated out and are now located
in clause 7.
New Clause 7 – Termination of Employment and
new clause has been updated to make it easier to follow and for consistency with
the National Employment Standards of the
Fair Work Act 2009
), Division 3 of Part 6-3 which requires non-national system employers
(including employers in the state industrial relations system)
to provide notice
of termination or payment in lieu to employees.
Additional Rates for Ordinary Hours
minimum payment referred to at the end of clause 9(1) has been deleted. As there
is no circumstance where the payment under the
clause would be less than the
minimum specified, that part of the clause is obsolete.
meal allowance in clause 9(2) has been adjusted commensurate with increases in
the takeaway and fast foods subcategory of the
consumer price index.
Clause 11 – Casual Employees
casual penalty provision at clause 11(2) has been relocated to clause 22 -
Wages, but the rate remains unchanged.
list of the Award’s provisions from which casual employees are exempt has
been updated to remove entitlements which extend
to casual employees by
operation of legislation.
Clause 12 – Part-Time Employees
part-time loading has been relocated to clause 22 - Wages.
14 – Meal Money
clause has been renamed ‘Meal Allowance’ The allowance has been
increased commensurate with increases in the takeaway
and fast foods subcategory
of the consumer price index.
Clause 15 – Sick Leave
previous clause was inconsistent with or less favourable than the MCE Act in
several respects.
to ‘sick pay’ and ‘sick leave’ have been replaced with
‘personal leave’, reflecting
the provisions of the MCE Act.
provisions of this clause have been amended to ensure the Award is not less
favourable than the statutory entitlements currently
Evidentiary
requirements for applications for personal leave are aligned with the MCE Act.
Clause 16 – Compassionate Leave
clause has been updated to align with the provisions of the MCE Act, including
by renaming the clause ‘Bereavement Leave’.
– Parental Leave
Award made no provision for parental leave, but clause 17 provided for Maternity
varied clause refers to parental leave being provided in accordance with the FW
Act. State system employers and employees are
subject to the provisions of
Division 5 of Part 2-2 of the FW Act.
New Clause 17A –
Family and Domestic Violence Leave
is a new clause. The Award made no provision for family and domestic violence
clause refers to the provisions of the FW Act for paid family and domestic
violence leave which apply to state system employers
and employees, as well as
relevant provisions of the MCE Act.
Clause 18 – Public
key provisions of this clause are largely unchanged. The main changes of note
(a) Easter Sunday has been included as a public holiday in the
Award, reflecting the provisions of s 3(2) and s 3(3) of the
Public and Bank
Holidays Act 1972
(WA). To achieve consistency with that Act, it is
necessary to stipulate Easter Sunday is not substituted for another day because
it falls on a weekend.
(b) ‘Foundation Day’ has been changed to ‘Western Australia
(c) The provision regarding special public holidays has been replaced with
provisions reflecting the provisions of the MCE Act which
entitle employees to
be absent from work on a day or part of a day that is a public holiday as
defined in the MCE Act.
(d) Additional clauses reflect the provisions of s 30 of the MCE Act.
Clause 19 – Annual Leave
clause has been updated to reflect the scheme of annual leave provided for in
the MCE Act and contemporary terminology. The entitlement
to travel time in
addition to annual leave for employees who work in the North West has been
updated to remove reference to the ports
of Fremantle and Geraldton, given that
travel for the purpose of taking annual leave is now unlikely to be via ports.
The outdated
reference to the Commonwealth Bureau of Statics has been replaced
with the Australian Bureau of Statistics
Clause 21 –
Payment of Wages
ability to pay wages by cheque has been removed. Clause 21(5) has been removed
as the obligation to provide payslips is provided
for in clause
Clause 22 – Wages
column indicating the Arbitrated Safety Net Adjustment component of the rates of
pay has been removed as it is unnecessary.
of pay that were less than the statutory minimum have been increased to the
current statutory minimum rate.
Clause 31 – Records
previous clause was out of date and did not correspond with Division 2F of the
IR Act with respect to the time and wages records
that must now be kept by
employers, as well as current provisions regarding right of entry by authorised
representatives.
amended clause makes reference to the requirements of Division 2F of Part 2 of
the IR Act.
Clause 32 – Rosters
changes have been made to ensure consistency of terminology used in other
updated clauses. For example, ‘occupation’
has been changed to
‘classification’, and ‘sickness’ changed to
‘personal leave’.
Clause 35 – Posting of Award
and Union Notices
the Award is available on the Commission’s website, an addition has been
made to the clause, to enable provision of the
Award by electronic means.
limitation on Union officials’ entering workplaces has been removed as
being inconsistent with the provisions of Part II
Division 2G of the IR
Clause 37 – District Allowance
clause’s definition of ‘de facto Spouse’ has been deleted, and
the definition of ‘spouse’ has been
amended to refer to a de facto
Clause 39 – Grievance Procedures
clause has been renamed ‘Dispute Resolution Procedures’ to reflect
the terminology used in the IR Act. The inaccurate
reference to ‘this
Agreement’ has been changed to ‘this
Clause 42 – Trade Union Training
is now clause 40. Reference to the defunct ‘Australian Trade Union
Training Authority’ has been replaced with the
‘Australian Trade
Union Institute’.
Clause 44 – Enterprise
Flexibility
Award’s current Clause 44 Enterprise Flexibility is the same type as the
clause I considered in APPL 27 of 2023:
Commission’s Own Motion v
(Not Applicable)
[2024] WAIRC 00013.
The clause is contrary to the
scheme of the Act and invalid. It has, therefore, been
Appendix – Resolution of Disputes
Requirements
appendix is outdated, being inserted in the Award in 1996 pursuant to the
Industrial Relations Legislation Amendment and Repeal Act 1995
to comply with what was then contained in s 49B of the IR Act, which was
repealed pursuant to
Labour Relations Reform Act 2002
The information in the appendix is therefore outdated and does not reflect the
current statutory provisions regarding inspection
of records.
appendix has been removed in its entirety.
Schedule A –
Named Union Party
name of the union party has been updated from United Voice WA to United Workers
Union (WA).
Schedule B – Respondents
names of the respondents have been updated to reflect the current names of the
relevant employing authorities under the
Public Sector Management Act 1994
Other changes
language has been removed.
Percentages
expressed as in words have been expressed numerically and with symbols.
clauses have been renumbered as a result of the deletion of other
variations contained in the schedule to these reasons shall take immediate
effect, and an order will issue accordingly.
Current Award
Catering Employees and Tea Attendants (Government)
Catering Employees and Tea Attendants (Government)
This award shall be known as the Catering Employees and Tea Attendants
(Government) Award 1982, and replaces Award No. 21 of 1972,
This award shall be known as the Catering Employees and Tea Attendants
(Government) Award.
1B. - MINIMUM ADULT AWARD WAGE
(1) No employee aged 21 or more shall be paid less than the minimum adult
award wage unless otherwise provided by this clause.
(2) The minimum adult award wage for full-time employees aged 21 or more
working under an award that provides for a 38-hour week is
$918.60 per week.
The minimum adult award wage for full-time employees aged 21 or more
working under awards that provide for other than a 38-hour week
is calculated as
follows: divide $918.60 by 38 and multiply by the number of ordinary hours
prescribed for a full-time employee under
The minimum adult award wage is payable from the beginning of the first pay
period commencing on or after 1 July 2024.
(3) The minimum adult award wage is deemed to include all State Wage order
adjustments from State Wage Case decisions.
(4) Unless otherwise provided in this clause adults aged 21 or more
employed as casuals, part-time employees or piece workers or employees
remunerated wholly on the basis of payment by results, shall not be paid less
than pro rata the minimum adult award wage
according to the hours worked.
(5) Employees under the age of 21 shall be paid no less than the wage
determined by applying the percentage prescribed in the junior
rates provision
in this award (if applicable) to the minimum adult award wage, provided that no
employee shall be paid less than
any applicable minimum rate of pay prescribed
Minimum Conditions of Employment Act 1993
(6) The minimum adult award wage shall not apply to apprentices, employees
engaged on traineeships or government approved work placement
programs or
employed under the Commonwealth Government Supported Wage System or to other
categories of employees who by prescription
are paid less than the minimum award
rate, provided that no employee shall be paid less than any applicable minimum
rate of pay prescribed
Minimum Conditions of Employment Act
(7) Liberty to apply is reserved in relation to any special category of
employees not included here or otherwise in relation to the
application of the
minimum adult award wage.
(8) Subject to this clause the minimum adult award wage shall –
(a) Apply to all work in ordinary hours.
(b) Apply to the calculation of overtime and all other penalty rates,
superannuation, payments during any period of paid leave and
for all purposes of
this award.
(9) Minimum Adult Award Wage
The rates of pay in this award include the minimum weekly wage for
employees aged 21 or more payable under the 2024 State Wage order.
Any increase
arising from the insertion of the minimum wage will be offset against any
equivalent amount in rates of pay received
by employees whose wages and
conditions of employment are regulated by this award which are above the wage
rates prescribed in the
award. Such above award payments include wages payable
pursuant to enterprise agreements, consent awards or award variations to
effect to enterprise agreements and over award arrangements. Absorption which
is contrary to the terms of an agreement is not
Increases under previous State Wage Case Principles or under the current
Statement of Principles, excepting those resulting from enterprise
agreements,
are not to be used to offset the minimum wage.
(10) Adult Apprentices
(a) Notwithstanding the provisions of this clause, the minimum adult
apprentice wage for a fulltime apprentice aged 21 years or more
working under an
award that provides for a 38-hour week is $762.80 per week.
(b) The minimum adult apprentice wage for a full-time apprentice aged 21
years or more working under an award that provides for other
than a 38-hour week
is calculated as follows: divide $762.80 by 38 and multiply by the number of
ordinary hours prescribed for a
full-time apprentice under the award.
(c) The minimum adult apprentice wage is payable from the beginning of the
first pay period commencing on or after 1 July 2024.
(d) Adult apprentices aged 21 years or more employed on a part-time basis
shall not be paid less than pro rata the minimum adult apprentice
wage according
to the hours worked.
(e) The rates paid in the paragraphs above to an apprentice 21 years of age
or more are payable on superannuation and during any period
of paid leave
prescribed by this award.
(f) Where in this award an additional rate is expressed as a percentage,
fraction or multiple of the ordinary rate of pay, it shall
be calculated upon
the rate prescribed in this award for the actual year of apprenticeship.
NO VARIATIONS
2. - ARRANGEMENT
1B. Minimum
Adult Award Wage
Arrangement
Definitions
Rates for Ordinary Hours
Compassionate
Service Leave
Apprentices
and Laundering
and Rest Rooms
of Award and Union Notices
to Attend Union Business
Union Training Leave
Leave for English Language Training
Flexibility
Appendix - Resolution of Disputes Requirements
Schedule A - Named Union Party
Schedule B - Respondents
Appendix - S.49B - Inspection Of Records Requirements
2. – ARRANGEMENT
– APPLICATION AND OPERATION
1B. Minimum
Adult Award Wage
Arrangement
Definitions
– CONTRACT OF EMPLOYMENT
of Employment
Termination
of Employment and Stand Down
– HOURS OF WORK
Rates for Ordinary Hours
– LEAVE AND PUBLIC HOLIDAYS
Bereavement
17A. Family and Domestic Violence Leave
Service Leave
– WAGES, ALLOWANCES AND FACILITIES
Apprentices
and Laundering
– OTHER MATTERS
and Rest Rooms
of Award and Union Notices
Resolution Procedures
to Attend Union Business
Union Training Leave
Leave for English Language Training
Schedule A – Named Union Party
Schedule B - Respondents
This award shall have effect throughout the State of Western
NO VARIATIONS
This award shall apply to all employees employed in the calling described
in Clause 22. - Wages of this award and who are employed
respondents to this award in catering establishments and as Tea Attendants, as
defined in Clauses 6. - Definitions and 23.
- Tea Attendants of this award,
provided that this award shall not apply to any employee who at the date of this
award is covered
by any other award registered or issued under the provisions of
Industrial Arbitration Act, 1979
This award shall apply to all employees employed in the calling described
in Clause 22. – Wages of this award and who are employed
respondents to this award in catering establishments and as Tea Attendants, as
defined in Clauses 5. – Definitions and
24.- Apprentices of this
award, provided that this award shall not apply to any employee who at the date
of this award is covered
by any other award registered or issued under the
provisions of the
Industrial Relations Act 1979
The term of this award shall be for a period of one year as from the
beginning of the first pay period commencing on or after the
19th day of
November, 1982.
CLAUSE DELETED
6. - DEFINITIONS
(1) “Catering Establishment” shall mean any meal room, dining
room, coffee shop, tea shop, or cafeteria, and includes
any place, building, or
part thereof, in or from which food is sold or served for consumption on the
premises or elsewhere.
(2) “Bar Attendant” shall mean an employee over the age of 18
years who serves liquor for sale from behind a bar counter.
(3) “Chef” shall mean an employee who is a “Qualified
Cook”, (as defined in subclause (4) hereof), and who
is appointed as such
by the employer.
(4) “Qualified Cook” shall mean an employee who has completed
and can produce appropriate documentary evidence to their
employer to the effect
that the employee has successfully completed an apprenticeship in cooking at an
approved or recognised school
or college, or who can provide documentary
evidence of having served at least six years in Her Majesty’s Armed Forces
classification of Cook.
(5) “Cook Employed Alone” shall mean an employee who is
employed when no other cook is employed during the employee’s
(6) “Cashier” shall mean an employee who is principally engaged
upon receiving monies in a dining room or restaurant area.
(7) “Daily Spread of Shift” shall mean the time which elapses
from the employee’s actual starting time to the employee's
finishing time for the day or shift.
(8) “Tea Attendant” shall mean an employee engaged either
wholly or for the major and substantial part of working time
making and/or
servicing morning and/or afternoon teas, washing up and other duties in
connection with such work.
5. – DEFINITIONS
(1) “Bar Attendant” shall mean an employee over the age of 18
years who serves liquor for sale from behind a bar counter.
(2) “Cashier” shall mean an employee who is principally engaged
upon receiving payment in a dining room or restaurant
(3) “Casual employee” shall mean an employee engaged on an
hourly basis for a period not exceeding four weeks in any workplace.
(4) “Catering Establishment” shall mean any meal room, dining
room, coffee shop, tea shop, canteen, restaurant or cafeteria,
and includes any
place, building, or part thereof, in or from which food is sold or served for
consumption on the premises or elsewhere.
(5) “Chef” shall mean an employee who is a “Qualified
Cook”, (as defined in subclause (9) hereof), and who
is appointed as such
by the employer.
(6) “Cook Employed Alone” shall mean an employee who is
employed when no other cook is employed during the employee’s
(7) “Daily Spread of Shift” shall mean the time which elapses
from the employee's actual starting time to the employee's
actual finishing time
for the day or shift.
(8) “Part time employee” shall mean an employee engaged to work
for not less than three or more than seven ordinary rostered
hours per day, and
not less than 15 or more than 35 hours each week.
(9) “Qualified Cook” shall mean an employee who has completed
and can produce appropriate documentary evidence to their
employer to the effect
that the employee has successfully completed an apprenticeship in cooking at an
approved or recognised school
or college, or who can provide documentary
evidence of having served at least six years in the Armed Forces in the
classification
(10) “Tea Attendant” shall mean an employee engaged either
wholly or for the major and substantial part of working time
making and/or
servicing morning and/or afternoon teas, washing up and other duties in
connection with such work.
Insert the following as a heading before clause 6 ‘Contract of
Employment’:
– CONTRACT OF EMPLOYMENT
7. - CONTRACT OF SERVICE
(1) Except for casual employees the contract of service shall be on a
weekly basis, provided that one week’s notice of termination
may be given
on either side on any working day, or in the event of such notice not being
given by the payment by the employer or
the forfeiture by the employee as the
case may be, of one week’s pay.
(2) This shall not affect the right of the employer to dismiss any employee
without notice for misconduct and in such cases wages
shall be paid up to the
time of dismissal only.
(3) (a) The foregoing provisions shall not affect the right of an employer
to stand down employees without pay during all vacation
periods when no work is
available. In respect to the Tertiary Education Institutions the vacation
periods will extend to include
those weeks which are calendarised as
non-teaching weeks and not requiring student attendance on campus.
(b) The employer shall advise the employee before the stand-down period has
commenced the date of resumption of work. Employees who
fail to advise the
employer at least 48 hours before the date of resumption that they are ready,
willing and available for work shall
be deemed to have terminated their contract
of employment.
(4) (a) An employer may direct an employee to carry out such duties as are
within the limits of the employee’s skill, competence
and training,
including work which is incidental or peripheral to the employee’s main
tasks or functions, provided that such
duties are not designed to promote
de-killing.
(b) An employer may direct an employee to carry out such duties and use
such tools and equipment as may be required, provided that
the employee has been
properly trained in the use of such tools and equipment.
(c) Any direction issued by an employer pursuant to paragraphs (a) and (b)
of this subclause shall be consistent with the provisions
of the Occupational
Health, Safety and Welfare Act 1984-1987 as amended.
6. - CONTRACT OF EMPLOYMENT
(1) An employee may be employed on a full time, part time or casual
(2) (a) An employer may direct an employee to carry out such duties as are
within the limits of the employee’s skill, competence
and training,
including work which is incidental or peripheral to the employee’s main
tasks or functions, provided that such
duties are not designed to promote
de-skilling.
(b) An employer may direct an employee to carry out such duties and use
such tools and equipment as may be required, provided that
the employee has been
properly trained in the use of such tools and equipment.
(c) Any direction issued by an employer pursuant to paragraphs (a) and (b)
of this subclause shall be consistent with the provisions
Work Health
and Safety Act 2020
(WA) as amended.
7. TERMINATION OF EMPLOYMENT AND STAND DOWN
(1) In order to terminate the employment of a full time or part time
employee the employer must give the employee the following notice
Period of continuous service with the
Minimum Period of Notice
Not more than 1
At least 1 week
More than 1 year but less than 3
At least 2 weeks
More than 3 years but less than
At least 3 weeks
More than 5 years
least 4 weeks
(2) An employee who at the time of being given notice is over 45 years of
age and who at the date of termination has completed two
years’ continuous
service with the employer, is entitled to one week’s notice in addition to
the notice prescribed in
clause 7(1).
(3) Payment in lieu of the notice prescribed in clause 7(1) and (2) must be
made if the prescribed notice period is not given. Provided
that employment may
be terminated by part of the period of notice specified and part payment in
(4) The period of notice in this subclause does not apply to those
employees who are exempt from receiving notice under Subdivision
A of Division
Fair Work Act 2009
(Cth), as amended from time to
(5) For the purpose of this clause an employee’s continuity of
service has the same meaning as prescribed in
Fair Work Act
(6) A full time or part time employee must give the employer one
week’s notice of termination.
(7) Nothing in this clause shall affect the right of the employer to
dismiss any employee without notice for misconduct and in such
cases wages shall
be paid up to the time of dismissal only.
(8) (a) The provisions of this clause shall not affect the right of an
employer to stand down employees without pay during all vacation
periods when no
work is available.
(b) The employer shall advise the employee before the stand-down period has
commenced the date of resumption of work.
Insert the following as a heading before clause 8
– HOURS OF WORK
(1) The ordinary hours of work shall be an average of 38 per week provided
(a) In no case are more than forty ordinary hours worked in any week;
(b) No more than eight ordinary hours are worked in any one day;
(c) Ordinary hours are worked on not more than five days in any week;
(d) Ordinary hours are worked within a daily spread of 11 hours.
(2) Except as provided in subclause (4) hereof, employees shall not be
required to work ordinary hours on more than 19 days in each
four week roster
(3) Employee shall be rostered such that in each four week roster cycle,
rostered days off are consecutive on at least two occasions.
(4) Notwithstanding the provisions of subclause (2) hereof, one rostered
day off in each four week roster cycle may be accumulated
to a maximum of ten
days in any one year. Such accumulated rostered days off may be taken at a time
mutually convenient to the employer
and the employee.
NO VARIATION
9. - ADDITIONAL RATES FOR ORDINARY HOURS
(1) A full-time or part-time employee who is required to work any ordinary
hours between 7.00 pm and 7.00 am Monday to Friday, inclusive,
be paid, in addition to the appropriate wage set out in Clause 22. - Wages, an
additional payment equivalent to 15% of the
wages paid for the time so worked
with a minimum payment of $3.65 per day.
(2) An employee who is required to work any of his ordinary hours on any
day in more than one period of employ and other than for
meal breaks as
prescribed by Clause 13. - Meal Breaks of this award, shall be paid an allowance
of $3.20 per day, for such broken
work period worked.
(3) All work performed during ordinary hours on a Saturday shall be paid at
the rate of time and one half.
(4) All work performed during ordinary hours on a Sunday shall be paid at
the rate of double time.
(5) Provided that any employee who was receiving a greater rate of penalty
for Saturday and/or Sunday work at the 29 October 1991
shall continue to receive
that greater rate of benefit.
(6) Where an employee’s rostered hours of duty in any day of the
weekend are extended by an early start or a late finish the
weekend rates as the
case may be shall be paid for such additional time worked in addition to any
overtime payable under Clause 10.
- Overtime of this Award.
9. - ADDITIONAL RATES FOR ORDINARY HOURS
(1) A full-time or part-time employee who is required to work any ordinary
hours between 7.00 pm and 7.00 am Monday to Friday, inclusive,
be paid, in addition to the appropriate wage set out in Clause 22. - Wages, an
additional payment equivalent to 15% of the
wages paid for the time so worked.
(2) An employee who is required to work any of their ordinary hours on any
day in more than one period of employ and other than for
meal breaks as
prescribed by Clause 13. - Meal Breaks of this award, shall be paid an allowance
of $4.50 per day, for such broken
work period worked.
(3) All work performed during ordinary hours on a Saturday shall be paid at
the rate of time and one half.
(4) All work performed during ordinary hours on a Sunday shall be paid at
the rate of double time.
(5) Provided that any employee who was receiving a greater rate of penalty
for Saturday and/or Sunday work at the 29 October 1991
shall continue to receive
that greater rate of benefit.
(6) Where an employee’s rostered hours of duty in any day of the
weekend are extended by an early start or a late finish the
weekend rates as the
case may be shall be paid for such additional time worked in addition to any
overtime payable under Clause 10.
- Overtime of this Award.
10. - OVERTIME
(1) All work performed at a time when according to an employee’s
roster that employee is not rostered to work, be overtime.
Without limiting the
generality of the foregoing all work done outside the daily spread of 11 hours,
or in excess of eight hours
in one day, or in excess of 40 hours in one week, or
in excess of 152 hours in a four week roster cycle shall be overtime provided
that where rostered days off are accumulated pursuant to Clause 8(4), 160
ordinary hours may be worked in a four week roster cycle
in which one rostered
day off is accumulated to be taken at a later, mutually convenient time.
(2) Subject to the provisions of subclause (3) hereof, all overtime worked
between Monday to Friday, both inclusive, and prior to
12 noon on a Saturday
shall be paid for at the rate of time and a half for the first two hours and
double time thereafter. All overtime
worked after 12 noon on a Saturday and all
day on a Sunday, shall be paid for at the rate of double time.
(3) All work done on an employee’s rostered day off shall be paid for
at the rate of double time with a minimum payment as for
three hours’
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in this award:
(a) an employer may require any employee to work reasonable overtime at
overtime rates and such employee shall work overtime in accordance
requirements;
(b) no organisation party to this award or employee or employees covered by
this award, shall in any way, whether directly or indirectly,
be a party to or
concerned in any ban, limitation or restriction upon the working of overtime in
accordance with the requirements
of this subclause.
NO VARIATION
11. - CASUAL EMPLOYEES
(1) A casual employee shall mean an employee engaged on an hourly contract
of service.
(2) Casual employees shall not be engaged for less than two consecutive
hours per time.
(3) Casual employees shall be paid at the rate of time and a half, provided
that this rate shall be increased to double time and a
half for all work
performed on the holidays referred to in subclause (1)(a) of Clause 18. - Public
Holidays of this award.
(4) The provisions of clauses
9. - Additional Rates for Ordinary Hours,
15. - Sick Leave,
16. - Compassionate Leave,
17. - Maternity Leave,
18. - Public Holidays,
19. - Annual leave and
20. - Long Service Leave
shall not apply to a casual employee.
11. – CASUAL EMPLOYEES
(1) Casual employees shall not be engaged for less than two consecutive
hours per time.
(2) Casual employees shall be paid at the rate double time and a half for
all work performed on the public holidays referred to in
subclause (1)(a) of
Clause 18. – Public Holidays of this award.
(3) The provisions of Clause 9. – Additional Rates for Ordinary
Hours and Clause 19 – Annual Leave, shall not apply to
12. - PART-TIME EMPLOYEES
(1) A part-time employee shall mean an employee engaged on a weekly
contract of service, who works regularly from week to week for
not less than
three or more than seven ordinary hours per day, and not less than 15 or more
than 35 hours each week over any five
(2) Part-time employees shall be paid 15% in addition to the rates
prescribed in Clause 22. - Wages. The provisions of Clause 9.
- Additional
Rates for Ordinary Hours shall also apply to part-time employees.
(3) All work performed at times when, according to an employee’s
roster, that employee is not rostered to work shall be overtime.
limiting the generality of the foregoing, all time worked by a part-time
employee beyond seven ordinary hours per day, 35
ordinary hours per week and/or
five days per week, shall be overtime and paid for at the appropriate overtime
rates prescribed in
Clause 10. - Overtime of this award.
12. – PART-TIME EMPLOYEES
(1) The provisions of Clause 9. – Additional Rates for Ordinary Hours
shall also apply to part-time employees.
(2) All work performed at times when, according to an employee’s
roster, that employee is not rostered to work shall be overtime.
limiting the generality of the foregoing, all time worked by a part-time
employee beyond seven ordinary hours per day, 35
ordinary hours per week and/or
five days per week, shall be overtime and paid for at the appropriate overtime
rates prescribed in
Clause 10. – Overtime of this award.
13. - MEAL BREAKS
(1) Every employee shall be entitled to a meal break of not less than one
half hour nor more than one hour, after not more than five
hours of work. Where
it is not possible for the employer to grant a meal break on any day, the said
meal break shall be treated
as time worked and the employee shall be paid at the
rate applicable to the employee at the time such meal break is due, plus 50
cent of the ordinary hourly rate applying to such employee, until such time as
the employee is released for a meal.
(2) In addition to breaks for a meal, there may be one other break of at
least two hours during each shift. Such break of two hours
may include a meal
13. – MEAL BREAKS
(1) Every employee shall be entitled to a meal break of not less than one
half hour nor more than one hour, after not more than five
hours of work. Where
it is not possible for the employer to grant a meal break on any day, the said
meal break shall be treated as
time worked and the employee shall be paid at the
rate applicable to the employee at the time such meal break is due, plus 50% of
the ordinary hourly rate applying to such employee, until such time as the
employee is released for a meal.
(2) In addition to breaks for a meal, there may be one other break of at
least two hours during each shift. Such break of two hours
may include a meal
14. - MEAL MONEY
When an employee is required to work overtime for more than one hour on any
day, he or she will either be supplied with a substantial
meal by the employer
or be paid $12.65 meal money.
14. – MEAL ALLOWANCE
When an employee is required to work overtime for more than one hour on any
day, the employee will either be supplied with a substantial
meal by the
employer or be paid $16.53 meal allowance.
Insert the following as a heading before clause 15 ‘Personal
– LEAVE AND PUBLIC HOLIDAYS
15. - SICK LEAVE
(1) (a) An employee other than a casual employee shall be entitled to
payment for non-attendance on the grounds of personal ill health
or injury of
one sixth of a week’s pay for each completed month of service.
(b) Payment hereunder may be adjusted at the end of each accruing year, or
at the time the employee leaves the service of the employer,
in the event of the
employee being entitled by service subsequent to the sickness in that year to a
greater allowance than that made
at the time the sickness occurred.
(2) The unused portion of the entitlement prescribed in paragraph (a)
hereof in any accruing year shall be allowed to accumulate and
may be availed of
in the next or any succeeding year.
(3) In order to acquire entitlement to payment in accordance with this
clause the employee shall as soon as reasonably practicable
advise the employer
of their inability to attend for work, the nature of their illness or injury and
the estimated duration of the
absence. Provided that such advice other than in
extraordinary circumstances shall be given to the employer within 24 hours of
commencement of the absence.
(4) No employee shall be entitled to the benefit of this clause unless they
produce proof to the satisfaction of the employer or representative
sickness provided that the employer shall not be entitled to a medical
certificate for absences of less than three consecutive
working days unless the
total of such absences exceeds five days in any one accruing year.
(5) (a) Subject to the provisions of this subclause, the provisions of this
clause apply to an employee who suffers personal ill health
or injury during the
time when the employee is absent on annual leave and an employee may apply for
and the employer shall grant
paid sick leave in place of paid annual
(b) Application for replacement shall be made within seven days of resuming
work and then only if the employee was confined to his/her
place of residence or
a hospital as a result of personal ill health or injury for a period of seven
consecutive days or more and
produces a certificate from a registered medical
practitioner that states that the employee was so confined. Provided that the
of this paragraph do not relieve the employee of the obligation to
advise the employer in accordance with subclause (3) of this clause
if unable to
attend for work on the working day next following his annual leave.
(c) Replacement of paid annual leave by paid sick leave shall not exceed
the period of paid sick leave to which the employee was entitled
at the time
they proceeded on annual leave and shall not be made with respect to fractions
(d) Where paid sick leave has been granted by the employer in accordance
with paragraphs (a), (b) and (c) of this subclause, that
portion of the annual
leave equivalent to the paid sick leave is hereby replaced by the paid sick
leave and the replaced annual leave
may be taken at another time mutually agreed
to by the employer and the employee or, failing agreement, shall be added to the
next period of annual leave or, if termination occurs before
then, be paid for in accordance with the provisions of Clause 19. -
(e) Payment for replaced annual leave shall be at the rate of wage
applicable at the time the leave is subsequently taken provided
that the annual
leave loading prescribed in Clause 19. - Annual Leave shall be deemed to have
been paid with respect to the replaced
annual leave.
(6) The provisions of this clause with respect to payment do not apply to
employees who are entitled to payment under the Workers’
Compensation Act
nor to employees whose illness or injury is the result of the employee's own
misconduct.
15. – PERSONAL LEAVE
Entitlement to paid personal leave:
(1) An employee, other than a casual employee, is entitled for each year of
service to paid personal leave for the number of hours
the employee is required
ordinarily to work in a 2 week period during that year.
(2) A year of service excludes periods of unpaid leave.
(3) Paid personal leave accrues pro rata on a weekly basis.
(4) The entitlement to personal leave is cumulative, and any leave not
taken in one year is carried over to the next year.
(5) An employee may take paid personal leave if the employee is unable to
(a) because of a personal illness or injury affecting the employee;
(b) to provide care or support to a member of the employee’s family
or household because of
(i) a personal illness or injury; or
(ii) an unexpected emergency
Notice and Evidence
(6) In order to acquire entitlement to payment in accordance with this
clause the employee shall as soon as reasonably practicable
advise the employer
of their inability to attend for work and the estimated duration of the absence.
Provided that such advice other
than in extraordinary circumstances shall be
given to the employer within 24 hours of the commencement of the absence.
(7) No employee shall be entitled to the benefit of this clause unless they
provide the employer with evidence that would satisfy
a reasonable person of the
entitlement. Provided that the employer shall not be entitled to a medical
certificate for absences of
less than three consecutive working days unless the
total of such absences exceeds five days in any one accruing year.
(8) Replacement of personal leave during annual leave:
(a) Subject to the provisions of this subclause, the provisions of this
clause apply to an employee who suffers personal ill health
or injury during the
time when the employee is absent on annual leave and an employee may apply for
and the employer shall grant
paid personal leave in place of paid annual
(b) Application for replacement shall be made within seven days of resuming
work and then only if the employee was confined to their
place of residence or a
hospital as a result of personal ill health or injury for a period of seven
consecutive days or more and
produces a certificate from a registered medical
practitioner that states that the employee was so confined. Provided that the
of this paragraph do not relieve the employee of the obligation to
advise the employer in accordance with subclause (6) of this clause
unable to attend for work on the working day next following their annual
(c) Replacement of paid annual leave by paid personal leave shall not
exceed the period of paid personal leave to which the employee
was entitled at
the time they proceeded on annual leave and shall not be made with respect to
fractions of a day.
(d) Where paid personal leave has been granted by the employer in
accordance with paragraphs (a), (b) and (c) of this subclause, that
the annual leave equivalent to the paid personal leave is hereby replaced by the
paid personal leave and the replaced
annual leave may be taken at another time
mutually agreed to by the employer and the employee or, failing agreement, shall
to the employee’s next period of annual leave or, if termination
occurs before then, be paid for in accordance with the provisions
of Clause 19.
– Annual Leave.
(e) Payment for replaced annual leave shall be at the rate of wage
applicable at the time the leave is subsequently taken provided
that the annual
leave loading prescribed in Clause 19. – Annual Leave shall be deemed to
have been paid with respect to the
replaced annual leave.
(9) The provisions of this clause with respect to payment do not apply to
employees who are entitled to payment under the
Workers’ Compensation
and Injury Management Act 2023
(WA) nor to employees whose illness or injury
is the result of the employee’s own misconduct.
(10) Entitlement to unpaid personal leave:
An employee, including a casual employee, is entitled to unpaid personal
leave of up to 2 days in accordance with the
Minimum Conditions of Employment
16. - COMPASSIONATE LEAVE
(1) An employee shall, on the death within Australia of a spouse, de facto
spouse, father, mother, brother, sister, child or stepchild
be entitled on
notice of leave up to and including the day of the funeral of such relation and
such leave shall be without deduction
of pay for a period not exceeding the
number of hours worked by the employee to two ordinary working days. Proof of
such death shall
be furnished by the employee to the satisfaction of the
(2) Provided that payment in respect of compassionate leave is to be made
only where the employee otherwise would have been on duty
and shall not be
granted in any case where the employee concerned would have been off duty in
accordance with his roster, or on long
service leave, annual leave, sick leave,
worker’s compensation, leave without pay or on a public holiday.
16. – BEREAVEMENT LEAVE
(1) An employee shall, on the death of a member of the employee’s
family or household (as defined in the
Minimum Conditions of Employment Act
(WA)), be entitled to paid bereavement leave of up to 2 days.
(2) The 2 days need not be consecutive.
(3) An employee who claims to be entitled to paid bereavement leave is to
provide the employer, if so requested by the employer, evidence
satisfy a reasonable person as to -
(a) the death that is the subject of the leave sought; and
(b) the relationship of the employee to the deceased person.
17. - MATERNITY LEAVE
(1) Eligibility for Maternity Leave
An employee who becomes pregnant shall, upon production to her employer of
a certificate from a duly qualified medical practitioner
stating the presumed
date of her confinement, be entitled to maternity leave provided that she has
had not less than 12 months’
continuous service with that employer
immediately preceding the date upon which she proceeds upon such leave.
For the purposes of this clause:
(a) An employee shall include a part-time employee but shall not include an
employee engaged upon casual or seasonal work.
(b) Maternity leave shall mean unpaid maternity leave.
(2) Period of Leave and Commencement of Leave
(a) Subject to subclauses (3) and (6) hereof, the period of maternity leave
shall be for an unbroken period of from 12 to 52 weeks
and shall include a
period of six weeks’ compulsory leave to be taken immediately before the
presumed date of confinement and
a period of six weeks’ compulsory leave
to be taken immediately following confinement.
(b) An employee shall, not less than 10 weeks prior to the presumed date of
confinement, give notice in writing to her employer stating
the presumed date of
confinement.
(c) An employee shall give not less than four weeks’ notice in
writing to her employer of the date upon which she proposes to
maternity leave, stating the period of leave to be taken.
(d) An employee shall not be in breach of this order as a consequence of
failure to give the stipulated period of notice in accordance
with paragraph (c)
hereof if such failure is occasioned by the confinement occurring earlier than
the presumed date.
(3) Transfer to a Safe-Job
Where in the opinion of a duly qualified medical practitioner, illness or
risks arising out of the pregnancy or hazards connected
with the work assigned
to the employee make it inadvisable for the employee to continue at her present
work, the employee shall,
if the employer deems it practicable, be transferred
to a safe job at the rate and on the conditions attaching to that job until
commencement of maternity leave.
If the transfer to a safe job is not practicable, the employee may, or the
employer may require the employee to, take leave for such
period as is certified
necessary by a duly qualified medical practitioner. Such leave shall be treated
as maternity leave for the
purposes of subclauses (7), (8), (9) and (10)
(4) Variation of Period of Maternity Leave
(a) Provided the addition does not extend the maternity leave beyond 52
weeks, the period may be lengthened once only, save with the
agreement of the
employer, by the employee giving not less than 14 days’ notice in writing
stating the period by which the
leave is to be lengthened.
(b) The period of leave may, with the consent of the employer, be shortened
by the employee giving not less than 14 days’ notice
in writing stating
the period by which the leave is to be shortened.
(5) Cancellation of Maternity Leave
(a) Maternity leave, applied for but not commenced, shall be cancelled when
the pregnancy of an employee terminates other than by
the birth of a living
(b) Where the pregnancy of an employee then on maternity leave terminates
other than by the birth of a living child, it shall be the
right of the employee
to resume work at a time nominated by the employer which shall not exceed four
weeks from the date of notice
in writing by the employee to the employer that
she desires to resume work.
(6) Special Maternity Leave and Sick Leave
(a) Where the pregnancy of an employee not then on maternity leave
terminates after 28 weeks other than by the birth of a living child
(i) she shall be entitled to such period of unpaid leave (to be known as
special maternity leave) as a duly qualified medical practitioner
certifies as
necessary before her return to work, or
(ii) for illness other than the normal consequences of confinement she
shall be entitled, either in lieu of or in addition to special
maternity leave,
to such paid sick leave as to which she is then entitled and which a duly
qualified medical practitioner certifies
as necessary before her return to
(b) Where an employee not then on maternity leave suffers illness related
to her pregnancy, she may take such paid sick leave as to
which she is then
entitled and such further unpaid leave (to be known as special maternity leave)
as a duly qualified medical practitioner
certifies as necessary before her
maternity leave and maternity
leave shall not exceed 52 weeks.
(c) For the purposes of subclauses (7), (8) and (9) hereof, maternity leave
shall include special maternity leave.
(d) An employee returning to work after the completion of a period of leave
taken pursuant to this subclause shall be entitled to
the position which she
held immediately before proceeding on such leave or, in the case of an employee
who was transferred to a safe
job pursuant to subclause (3), to the position she
held immediately before such transfer.
Where such position no longer exists but there are other positions
available, for which the employee is qualified and the duties of
which she is
capable of performing, she shall be entitled to a position as nearly comparable
in status and salary or wage to that
of her former position.
(7) Maternity Leave and Other Leave Entitlements
Provided the aggregate of leave including leave taken pursuant to
subclauses (3) and (6) hereof does not exceed 52 weeks.
(a) An employee may, in lieu of or in conjunction with maternity leave,
take any annual leave or long service leave or any part thereof
to which she is
then entitled.
(b) Paid sick leave or other paid authorised award absences (excluding
annual leave or long service leave), shall not be available
to an employee
during her absence on maternity leave.
(8) Effect of Maternity Leave on Employment
Notwithstanding any award, or other provision to the contrary, absence on
maternity leave shall not break the continuity of service
of an employee but
shall not be taken into account in calculating the period of service for any
purpose of the award.
(9) Termination of Employment
(a) An employee on maternity leave may terminate her employment at any time
during the period of leave by notice given in accordance
with this award.
(b) An employer shall not terminate the employment of an employee on the
ground of her pregnancy or of her absence on maternity leave,
but otherwise the
rights of an employer in relation to termination of employment are not hereby
(10) Return to Work After Maternity Leave
(a) An employee shall confirm her intention of returning to her work by notice
in writing to the employer given not less than four
weeks prior to the
expiration of her period of maternity leave.
17. – PARENTAL LEAVE
Parental leave is as provided for in accordance with Division 5 of
Fair Work Act 2009
17A. FAMILY AND DOMESTIC VIOLENCE LEAVE
Family and domestic violence leave is as provided for in Division 7 of
Fair Work Act 2009
(Cth) and the
Minimum Conditions of
Employment Act 1993
18. - PUBLIC HOLIDAYS
(1) (a) The following days or the days observed in lieu shall, subject as
hereinafter provided be allowed as holidays without deduction
of pay namely, New
Year’s Day, Australia Day, Good Friday, Easter Monday, Anzac Day, Labour
Day, Foundation Day, Sovereign’s
Birthday, Christmas Day and Boxing Day.
Provided that another day may be taken as a holiday by arrangement between the
lieu of any of the days named in the subclause.
(b) When any of the days mentioned in paragraph (a) hereof falls on a
Saturday or a Sunday the holiday shall be observed on the next
Monday, and when Boxing Day falls on a Sunday or a Monday the holiday shall be
observed on the next succeeding Tuesday.
In each case the substituted day shall
be a holiday without deduction of pay and the day for which it is substituted
shall not be
(2) Whenever any of the days referred to in subclause (1)(a) hereof falls
on an employee’s ordinary working day and the employee
is not required to
work on such a day, the employee shall be paid for the ordinary hours the
employee would have worked on such day
had it not been a holiday. Where an
employee’s rostered day off coincides with any of the holidays referred to
in subclause
(1)(a) hereof, such employee shall receive one day’s
additional pay at ordinary rates from the employer.
(3) Any employee required to work on a holiday shall be paid for the time
worked at the rate of double time and one half.
(4) When an employee is off duty owing to leave without pay, any holiday
falling during such absence shall not be treated as a paid
holiday. Where the
employee is on duty or is available on the whole of the working day immediately
preceding a holiday or resumes
duty or is available on the whole of the working
day immediately following a holiday, as prescribed in this clause, the employee
shall be entitled to a paid holiday on all such holidays.
(5) Whereas -
(a) a day is proclaimed as a public holiday or as a public half-holiday
under section 7 of the
Public and Bank Holidays Act, 1972
(b) that proclamation does not apply throughout the State or to the
metropolitan area of the State,
that day shall be a whole holiday or, as the case may be, a half holiday
for the purpose of this award within the district or locality
specified in the
proclamation.
18. – PUBLIC HOLIDAYS
(1) (a) The following days are recognised as public holidays for the
purpose of this Award:
New Year’s Day, Australia Day, Good Friday, Easter Sunday, Easter
Monday, Anzac Day, Labour Day, Western Australia Day, Sovereign’s
Birthday, Christmas Day and Boxing Day.
(b) An employee is entitled to be absent from work on a day or part of a day
that is a public holiday for the purpose of this award,
or a public holiday as
defined in the
Minimum Conditions of Employment Act 1993
(c) When any of the days mentioned in paragraph (a) hereof other than Easter
Sunday falls on a Saturday or a Sunday the holiday shall
be observed on the next
succeeding Monday, and when Boxing Day falls on a Sunday or a Monday the holiday
shall be observed on the
next succeeding Tuesday. In each case the substituted
day shall be a holiday without deduction of pay and the day for which it is
substituted shall not be a holiday.
(2) Whenever any of the days referred to in subclause (1)(a)
hereof falls on an employee’s ordinary working day and the employee
required to work on such a day, the employee shall be paid for the ordinary
hours the employee would have worked on such day
had it not been a holiday.
Where an employee’s rostered day off coincides with any of the holidays
referred to in subclause
(1)(a) hereof, such employee shall receive one day's
additional pay at ordinary rates from the employer.
(3) The employer may request that an employee work on a day or part of a
day that is a public holiday if the request is reasonable.
(4) If the employer makes a request, the employee may refuse the request
(a) the request is not reasonable; or
(b) the refusal is reasonable.
(5) In determining whether a request or refusal is reasonable, the
following must be taken into account —
(a) the nature and conduct of the employer’s business or operations;
(b) the nature of the employee’s work;
(c) the employee’s personal circumstances, including family
responsibilities
(d) whether the employee could reasonably expect that the employer might
request work on the public holiday;
(e) whether the employee is entitled to receive overtime payments, penalty
rates or other compensation (including compensation in
the form of an annualised
salary) for, or a level of remuneration that reflects an expectation of, work
on the public holiday;
(f) the type of employment of the employee (for example, whether full-time,
part-time, casual or shift work);
(g) the amount of notice in advance of the public holiday given
(i) by the employer when making the request; or
(ii) by the employee when refusing the request.
(6) Any employee required to work on a public holiday shall be paid for
the time worked at the rate of double time and one half.
(7) When an employee is off duty owing to leave without pay, any public
holiday falling during such absence shall not be treated as
a paid public
holiday. Where the employee is on duty or is available on the whole of the
working day immediately preceding a public
holiday or resumes duty or is
available on the whole of the working day immediately following a public
holiday, as prescribed in
this clause, the employee shall be entitled to a paid
public holiday on all such public holidays.
(8) Where –
(a) a day is proclaimed as a public holiday or as a public half-holiday
under section 7 of the
Public and Bank Holidays Act 1972
(b) that proclamation applies either throughout the State or within a
district or locality as specified in the proclamation;
that day shall be a whole holiday or, as the case may be, a half holiday
for the purpose of this award within the district or locality
specified in the
proclamation.
19. - ANNUAL LEAVE
(1) Except as hereinafter provided, a period of four consecutive
weeks’ leave with payment of ordinary wages as prescribed shall
annually to an employee by the employer after a period of twelve months’
continuous service with such employer.
(2) “Ordinary wages” for an employee shall mean the rate of
wage including service pay the employee has received for the
greatest proportion
of the calendar month prior to his taking the leave.
(3) If any award holiday falls within an employee’s period of annual
leave and is observed on a day which in the case of that
employee would have
been an ordinary working day, there shall be added to that period one day being
an ordinary working day for each
such holiday observed as aforesaid.
(4) If after one month’s continuous service in any qualifying twelve
monthly period an employee lawfully terminates his/her
employment or the
employment is terminated by the employer through no fault of the employee, the
employee shall be paid 2.92 hours’
pay at the ordinary rate of wage in
respect of each completed week of continuous service in that qualifying
(5) In addition to any payment to which the employee may be entitled under
subclause (4) of this clause, an employee whose employment
terminates after
he/she has completed a twelve monthly qualifying period and who has not been
allowed leave prescribed under this
award in respect of that qualifying period,
shall be given payment in lieu of that leave unless:-
(a) the employee has been justifiably dismissed for misconduct; and
(b) the misconduct for which the employee has been dismissed occurred prior
to the completion of that qualifying period.
(6) An employee may be rostered off and granted annual leave with payment
of ordinary wages as prescribed prior to having completed
a period of twelve
months’ continuous service, in which case should the services of such
employee terminate or be terminated
prior to the completion of twelve
months’ continuous service, the said employee shall refund to the employer
the difference
between the amount received for wages in respect of the period of
their annual leave and the amount which would have accrued to the
employee by
reason of the length of service up to the date of the termination of their
(7) (a) Subject to subclause (3) of this clause, when computing the annual
leave due under this clause, no deduction shall be made
from such leave in
respect of the period that an employee is on annual leave and/or holidays.
Provided that no deduction shall be
made for any approved period an employee is
absent from duty through sickness, with or without pay, unless the absence
exceeds three
calendar months, in which case deduction may be made for such
excess only.
(b) Approved periods of absence from work caused through accident sustained
in the course of employment shall not be considered breaks
in continuity of
service, but the first six months only of any such period shall count as service
for the purpose of computing annual
(8) When work is closed down for the purpose of allowing annual leave to be
taken, employees with less than a full year’s service
shall only be
entitled to payment during such period for the number of days’ leave due
to them. Provided that nothing herein
contained shall deprive the
employer’s right to retain such employees during the close down period as
may be required.
(9) Employees regularly working for the Government north of south latitude
26 shall be paid 1 (one) week additional leave per year
and allowed to
accumulate annual leave for two years, subject to the convenience of the
Department. Such employees who proceed to
Fremantle and Geraldton during the
period of such leave shall be allowed once in each two years reasonable
travelling time on the
forward and return journeys between the place of their
employment and either of the said ports.
(10) Annual leave may be taken in more than one period of leave, by mutual
agreement between the employer and employee.
Annual Leave Loading
(11) During the period of annual leave an employee shall receive a loading
calculated on the rate of wage prescribed by subclause
(2) hereof. This loading
shall be 17-1/2 per cent provided that in no case shall the loading for four
weeks’ leave exceed
the amount set out in the Commonwealth Bureau of
Census and Statistics publication for “Average Weekly Earnings per Male
Unit” in W.A. for the September quarter immediately preceding
the date of accrual of such leave.
The loading prescribed by this subclause shall not apply to proportionate
leave on termination.
19. – ANNUAL LEAVE
(1) An employee, other than a casual employee, is entitled for each year of
service to paid annual leave for the number of hours the
employee is required
ordinarily to work in a 4 week period during that year.
(2) Annual leave accrues pro rata on a weekly basis.
(3) Annual leave is cumulative, and any leave not taken in one year is
carried over to the next year.
(4) If any award public holiday falls within an employee’s period of
annual leave and is observed on a day which in the case
of that employee would
have been an ordinary working day, the employee:
(a) is taken not to be on paid annual leave or paid personal leave on that
public holiday; and
(b) is entitled to be absent from work on that public holiday; and
(c) is entitled to be paid for that public holiday in accordance
(5) If an employee lawfully leaves their employment or the employment is
terminated by the employer through no fault of the employee,
the employee shall
be paid for any untaken annual leave to which the employee is entitled.
(6) If an employee leaves employment or the employment is terminated by the
employer in circumstances other than those referred to
in clause 19(5) the
employee is to be paid for any untaken leave that relates to a completed year of
service, except that if the
employee is dismissed for misconduct, the employee
is not entitled to be paid or any untaken leave that relates to a year of
that was completed after the misconduct occurred.
(7) An employee may be rostered off and granted annual leave with payment
of ordinary wages as prescribed prior to having accrued
the leave, in which case
should the services of such employee terminate or be terminated prior to the
completion of sufficient service
to have accrued the leave, the said employee
shall refund to the employer the difference between the amount received for
respect of the period of their annual leave and the amount which would
have accrued to the employee by reason of the length of service
up to the date
of the termination of their services.
(8) (a) Subject to subclause (3) of this clause, when computing the annual
leave due under this clause, no deduction shall be made
from such leave in
respect of the period that an employee is on annual leave and/or public
holidays, nor for any approved period
of personal leave, with or without
(b) Approved periods of absence from work caused through accident sustained
in the course of employment shall not be considered breaks
in continuity of
(9) When work is closed down for the purpose of allowing annual leave to be
taken, employees with less than a full year’s service
shall only be
entitled to payment during such period for the number of days’ leave due
to them. Provided that nothing herein
contained shall deprive the
employer’s right to retain such employees during the close down period as
may be required.
(10) Employees regularly working north of south latitude 26 shall be paid 1
(one) week additional leave per year and allowed to accumulate
annual leave for
two years, subject to the convenience of the Department. Such employees shall be
allowed once in each two years
reasonable travelling time for travel between
the place of their employment and Perth or Geraldton for the purpose of taking
(11) Where an employee and employer have not agreed when the employee is to
take annual leave, subject to the employee giving the
employer at least 2
weeks’ notice, the employer is not to refuse the employee taking, at any
time suitable to the employee,
any period of annual leave the entitlement to
which accrued more than 12 months before that time.
Annual Leave Loading
(12) During the period of annual leave an employee shall receive a 17.5%
loading calculated on the rate of pay the employee would
have received under
clause 22 at the time the employee takes the leave, provided that in no case
shall the loading for four weeks’
leave exceed the amount set out in the
Australian Bureau of Statistics publication for “Average Weekly Earnings
Full Time Males
Western Australia” in W.A. for the November quarter
immediately preceding the date of accrual of such leave.
The loading prescribed by this subclause shall not apply to proportionate
leave on termination.
20. - LONG SERVICE LEAVE
The conditions governing the granting of Long Service Leave to government
wages employees generally shall apply to employees covered
by this award.
NO VARIATIONS
Insert the following as a heading before clause 21. ‘Payment of
– WAGES, ALLOWANCES AND
21. - PAYMENT OF WAGES
(1) (a) The employer may elect to pay employees in cash, by cheque or by
means of a credit transfer to a bank, building society or
credit union account
in the name of the employee. The day that the credit transfer is credited to
the employee’s account shall
be deemed to be the date of payment.
(b) Payment shall be made within three working days from the last day of
the pay period and if in cash or by cheque shall be made
employee’s ordinary working hours.
(c) No employer shall change its method of payment to employees without
first giving them at least four weeks’ notice of such
(d) No employee shall be required to accept a change in the method of
payment if such change causes hardship. Any dispute concerning
hardship in a
particular case shall be referred to the Industrial Relations Commission.
(2) (a) The employer may elect to pay employees weekly or fortnightly in
accordance with subclause (1) of this clause.
(b) No employer shall change the frequency of payment to employees without
first giving them and the Union at least four weeks’
notice of such
(c) The method of introducing a fortnightly pay system shall be by the
payment of an additional week’s wages in the last weekly
pay before the
change to fortnightly pays to be repaid by equal fortnightly deduction made from
the next and subsequent pays provided
the period for repayment shall not be less
than 20 weeks or some other method agreed upon by the Union and employer.
(3) For the purpose of effecting the rostering off of workers as provided
by this award, such wages may be either for the actual hours
worked each week;
or an amount being the calculated weekly average of the wages accruing over the
two or three or four as the case
may be, consecutive weekly period.
(4) An employee who lawfully terminates their employment or is dismissed by
the employer for reasons other than misconduct, shall
be paid all wages due to
them by the employer on the day of termination of employment
(5) At the time of being paid, each employee shall be issued with a
statement by the employer showing the gross wages and allowances
due to them and
all deductions made therefrom.
21. – PAYMENT OF WAGES
(1) (a) The employer may elect to pay employees in cash or by electronic
funds transfer to a bank, building society or credit union
account in the name
of the employee. The day that the electronic funds transfer is credited to the
employee’s account shall
be deemed to be the date of payment.
(b) Payment shall be made within three working days from the last day of
the pay period and if in cash shall be made during the employee's
working hours.
(c) No employer shall change its method of payment to employees without
first giving them at least four weeks’ notice of such
(d) No employee shall be required to accept a change in the method of
payment if such change causes hardship. Any dispute concerning
hardship in a
particular case shall be referred to the Western Australian Industrial Relations
Commission.
(2) (a) The employer may elect to pay employees weekly or fortnightly in
accordance with subclause (1) of this clause.
(b) No employer shall change the frequency of payment to employees without
first giving them and the Union at least four weeks’
notice of such
(c) The method of introducing a fortnightly pay system shall be by the
payment of an additional week’s wages in the last weekly
pay before the
change to fortnightly pays to be repaid by equal fortnightly deduction made from
the next and subsequent pays provided
the period for repayment shall not be less
than 20 weeks or some other method agreed upon by the Union and employer.
(3) For the purpose of effecting the rostering off of workers as provided
by this award, such wages may be either for the actual hours
worked each week;
or an amount being the calculated weekly average of the wages accruing over the
two or three or four as the case
may be, consecutive weekly period.
(4) An employee who lawfully terminates their employment or is dismissed by
the employer for reasons other than misconduct, shall
be paid all wages due to
them by the employer on the day of termination of employment.
22. - WAGES
It is a term of this Award that the Union undertakes for the duration of
the Principles determined by the Commission in Court Session
in Matter No. 1940
of 1989 not to pursue any extra claim, award or over award except where
consistent with the State Wage Principles.
The following shall be the minimum rates of wage payable to employees
covered by this award:-
Classifications:
Base Rate (per week) $
Arbitrated Safety Net Adjustments
(per week) $
Total Award Rate (per week) $
Qualified Cook
Cook Employed Alone
Other Cooks
Bar Attendant
Waiter/Waitress
Steward/Stewardess
Counterhand
Tea Attendant
Kitchenhand
General Hand
Arbitrated Safety Net Adjustments
(i) The rates of pay in this award include arbitrated safety net
adjustments available since December 1993, under the Arbitrated Safety
Adjustment Principle.
These arbitrated safety net adjustments may be offset against any
equivalent amount in the rate of pay received by employees since
1 November 1991
above the rate prescribed in the Award, except where such absorption is contrary
to the terms of an industrial agreement.
Increases in rates of pay otherwise made under the State Wage Case
Principles, excepting those resulting from enterprise agreements,
are not to be
used to offset arbitrated safety net adjustments.
(2) In addition to the above wage rates service pay will be paid for each
year of service at the following rates per week:
Year 3 and thereafter
(3) Leading Hands -
An employee (other than a Chef) who is appointed and placed in charge of
other employees by the employer shall be paid the following
rates in addition to
his or her normal wage per week:-
If placed in charge of less than six employees
If placed in charge of six to ten employees
If placed in charge of 11 to 20 employees
If placed in charge of more than 20 employees
22. – WAGES
The following shall be the minimum rates of wage payable to employees
covered by this award:-
Classifications:
Minimum Weekly Rate (per week) $
Qualified Cook
Cook Employed Alone
Other Cooks
Bar Attendant
Counterhand
Tea Attendant
Kitchenhand
General Hand
(2) A casual employee must be paid a loading of 50% for each hour
(3) A part-time employee must be paid a loading of 15% for each hour
(4) In addition to the above wage rates service pay will be paid for each
year of service at the following rates per week:
(5) Leading Hands –
An employee (other than a Chef) who is appointed and placed in charge of
other employees by the employer shall be paid the following
rates in addition to
his or her normal wage per week:-
If placed in charge of less than six
If placed in charge of sex to ten
If placed in charge of 11 to 20
If placed in charge of more than 20
23. - JURY SERVICE
(1) Any employee required to serve on a jury shall as soon as possible
after being summoned to serve, notify the employer. The summons
to serve must be
produced when making an application to obtain this leave.
(2) Any employee required to serve on a jury shall be granted by the
employer leave of absence without loss of pay, but only for such
a period as is
required to enable the employee to carry out his/her duties as a juror.
(3) An employee granted leave of absence on full pay as prescribed in
subclause (2) of this clause is not entitled to retain any juror's
shall pay all fees received to the employer.
23. – JURY SERVICE
(1) Any employee required to serve on a jury shall as soon as possible
after being summoned to serve, notify the employer. The summons
to serve must be
produced when making an application to obtain this leave.
(2) Any employee required to serve on a jury shall be granted by the
employer leave of absence without loss of pay, but only for such
a period as is
required to enable the employee to carry out their duties as a juror.
(3) An employee granted leave of absence on full pay as prescribed in
subclause (2) of this clause is not entitled to retain any juror’s
but shall pay all fees received to the employer.
24. - APPRENTICES
(1) Apprentices may be taken to the trade of cooking in the ratio of one
apprentice for every one qualified cook employed and shall
not be taken in
excess of that ratio unless:
(a) the union so agrees; or
(b) the Commission so determines.
(2) Wages (per week) expressed as a percentage of the
“Tradesman’s Rates” -
Four Year Term -
Second year
Fourth year
Three and a Half Year Term -
First six months
Next following year
Third Year Term -
Second year
(d) For the purposes of this subclause the term “Tradesman’s
Rate” means the total rate payable to a “Qualified
prescribed in Clause 22. - Wages, of this award.
24. – APPRENTICES
(1) Apprentices may be taken to the trade of cooking in the ratio of one
apprentice for every one qualified cook employed and shall
not be taken in
excess of that ratio unless:
(a) the Union so agrees; or
(b) the Commission so determines.
(2) Wages (per week) expressed as a percentage of the “Qualified Cook
Four Year Term -
Second year
Fourth year
Three and a Half Year Term –
First six months
Next following year
Third Year Term –
Second year
25. - BAR WORK
Any employee other than a Bar Attendant, who in addition to their normal
duties is required to dispense liquor from a bar, shall be
paid a flat rate of
$1.25 cents per day in addition to the rate prescribed for such normal
NO VARIATIONS
26. - HIGHER DUTIES
(1) Any employee performing work for two or more hours in any day on duties
carrying a higher prescribed rate of wage than that in
which they are engaged,
shall be paid the higher wage for the time so employed, provided that where an
employee is engaged for more
than half of one day or shift on duties carrying a
higher rate the employee shall be paid the higher rate for such day or
(2) Any employee who is required to perform duties carrying a lower
prescribed rate of wage, shall do so without any loss of pay.
NO VARIATIONS
27. - UNIFORMS AND LAUNDERING
Where uniforms are required to be worn by the employer they shall be
supplied and laundered by the employer and remain the property
of the employer,
provided that in lieu of the employer laundering same, the employee shall be
paid $4.80 per week for such laundering.
Provided further, that any employee
employed as a Cook shall be paid $7.20 per week for laundering.
NO VARIATIONS
28. - PROTECTIVE CLOTHING
(1) Employees who are required to wash dishes. or otherwise handle
detergents, acids, soaps or any injurious substances, shall be
supplied with
rubber gloves free of charge by the employer, or be paid an allowance of $2.40
per week in lieu.
(2) Where the conditions of work are such that employees are unable to
avoid their clothing becoming dirty or wet, they shall be supplied
with suitable
protective clothing free of charge by the employer.
(3) Where the conditions of work are such that employees are unable to
avoid their feet becoming wet, they shall be supplied by the
employer free of
charge with suitable protective footwear.
(4) All articles supplied shall remain the property of the employer and
shall be returned when required, in good order and condition,
fair wear and tear
(5) Where any of the above protective equipment is provided the employee
shall use the equipment for the purpose for which it is intended.
28. - PROTECTIVE CLOTHING
(1) Employees who are required to wash dishes. or otherwise handle
detergents, acids, soaps or any injurious substances, shall be
supplied with
rubber gloves free of charge by the employer, or be paid an allowance of $2.54
per week in lieu.
NO OTHER VARIATIONS
29. – EMPLOYEE’S EQUIPMENT
All knives, choppers, tools, brushes. towels and other utensils, implements
and material which may be required to be used by the employee
for the purpose of
carrying out their duties, shall be supplied by the employer free of charge.
Provided that where an employee is required by the employer to use his own
knives he shall be paid an allowance of $11.50 per week.
29. – EMPLOYEE’S EQUIPMENT
All knives, choppers, tools, brushes. towels and other utensils, implements
and material which may be required to be used by the employee
for the purpose of
carrying out their duties, shall be supplied by the employer free of charge.
Provided that where an employee is required by the employer to use their
own knives they shall be paid an allowance of $11.50 per
30. - TRAVELLING FACILITIES
(1) Where an employee is detained at work until it is too late to travel by
the last ordinary bus, train or other regular public conveyance
to their usual
place of residence the employer shall provide proper conveyance free of
(2) If an employee is required to start work before the first ordinary
means of public conveyance (hereinbefore described) is available
to convey them
from their usual place of residence to the place of employment, the employer
shall provide a conveyance free of charge.
(3) The provisions of subclauses (1) and (2) of this clause do not apply to
an employee who usually has their own means of conveyance.
NO VARIATIONS
Insert the following as a heading before clause 31
– OTHER MATTERS
31. - RECORD
(1) The employer shall keep, or cause to be kept, a time and wages record
wherein shall be entered the following information: .
(a) The full name, and occupation of each employee employed and whether the
employee is being employed on a full-time, part-time or
casual contract of
(b) The time each employee commences and finishes work each day, including
any breaks in shift;
(c) The number of hours worked each day by each employee and the total
hours worked each pay period;
(d) The wages and (if any) overtime and allowances paid to each employee
each pay period;
(e) The age of any employee employed on junior rates of pay.
(2) The record shall be open for inspection to a duly accredited
representative of the union during ordinary office hours. Such representative
shall be permitted time to inspect the record and, if he requires shall be
allowed to take any extract or copy of any of the information
contained in the
Before exercising a power of inspection the representative shall give
reasonable notice of not less than 24 hours to the employer
31. – RECORDS
An employer must keep employment records and provide pay slips in
accordance with
, Division 2F – Keeping of and access to employment
records and pay slips of the
Industrial Relations Act 1979
Conditions regarding right of entry by authorised representatives of the
Union for the purpose of inspection of records are dealt
Division G – Right of entry and inspection by authorised representatives
Industrial Relations Act 1979
32. - ROSTER
(1) A roster of the working hours of each employee shall be exhibited in
such place by the employer so as it may be conveniently and
readily seen by each
(2) Such roster shall show:
(a) the name and occupation of each employee;
(b) the hours to be worked by each employee each day and the breaks in
shift to be taken.
(3) The roster shall be open for inspection to a duly accredited
representative of the union at such time as the “record”
for inspection.
(4) Such rosters shall be drawn up in such a manner as to show the working
hours of each employee for at least one week in advance
of the date of the
roster and may only be altered on account of the sickness of an employee, or by
mutual consent between the employee
and the employer concerned.
(5) In addition to the roster of working hours as prescribed by subclauses
(1)-(4) of this clause, a roster of working days and rostered
days off for each
employee shall be maintained by the employer and exhibited in such a place so as
it may be conveniently and readily
seen by each employee. Such a roster shall
show working days and rostered day off at least four weeks in advance and shall
varied at the request of an employee with respect to whom the variation
32. – ROSTERS
(1) A roster of the working hours of each employee shall be exhibited in
such place by the employer so as it may be conveniently and
readily seen by each
employee, or provided by electronic means reasonably accessible to all
(2) Such roster shall show:
(a) the name and classification of each employee;
(b) the hours to be worked by each employee each day and the breaks in
shift to be taken.
(3) The roster shall be available for inspection to a duly accredited
representative of the Union in accordance with clause 31.
(4) Such rosters shall be drawn up in such a manner as to show the working
hours of each employee for at least one week in advance
of the date of the
roster and may only be altered on account of the personal leave of an employee,
or by mutual consent between the
employee and the employer concerned.
(5) In addition to the roster of working hours as prescribed by
subclauses (1)-(4) of this clause, a roster of working days and rostered
days off for each employee shall be maintained by the employer and either made
accessible electronically or exhibited in such a place
so as it may be
conveniently and readily seen by each employee. Such a roster shall show working
days and rostered day off at least
four weeks in advance and shall only be
varied at the request of an employee with respect to whom the variation is
33. - CHANGE AND REST ROOMS
Adequate change and rest rooms shall be provided by the employer where such
are reasonably practicable.
NO VARIATIONS
34. - FIRST AID KIT
In each establishment the employer shall provide and continuously maintain
at a place easily accessible to all employees an adequate
First Aid Kit.
NO VARIATIONS
35. - POSTING OF AWARD AND UNION NOTICES
(1) A copy of this award shall be exhibited by the employer on the business
premises in such a place where it may be conveniently
and readily seen by each
(2) The Secretary of the Union, or any other duly accredited representative
of the union, shall be permitted to post notices relating
to union business in
such a place where it may be conveniently and readily seen by each
Provided that nothing in this subclause shall empower a duly accredited
official of the union to enter any part of the premises of
the employer,
pursuant to this subclause, unless the employer is the employer or former
employer of a member of the Union.
35. – POSTING OF AWARD AND UNION NOTICES
(1) A copy of this award shall be exhibited by the employer on the business
premises in such a place where it may be conveniently
and readily seen by each
employee or made accessible electronically.
(2) The Secretary of the Union, or any other duly accredited representative
of the Union, shall be permitted to post notices relating
to Union business in
such a place where it may be conveniently and readily seen by each
36. - DELETED
CLAUSE DELETED
37. - BREAKDOWNS
The employer shall be entitled to deduct payment for any day or portion of
a day upon which the employee cannot be usefully employed,
because of any strike
by the union or unions affiliated with it, or by any other association or union,
or through the breakdown of
the employer's machinery or any stoppage of work by
any cause which the employer cannot reasonably prevent.
RENUMBERED TO CLAUSE 36
38. - DISTRICT ALLOWANCE
(1) For the purposes of this clause the following terms shall have the
following meaning:
“Dependant” in relation to an employee means:
(a) a spouse; or(b) where there is no spouse, a child or any other relative
resident within the State who relies on the employee for
who does not receive a district or location allowance of any kind.
“Partial Dependant” in relation to an employee means:
(a) a spouse; or
(b) where there is no spouse, a child or any other relative resident within
the State who relies on the employee for their main support;
who receives a district or location allowance of any kind less than that
applicable to an employee without dependants under any award,
agreement or other
provision regulating the employment of the partial dependant.
“Spouse” means an employee's spouse including de facto spouse.
“De facto Spouse” means a person of the opposite sex to the
employee who lives with the employee as the husband or wife
of the employee on a
bona fide domestic basis, although not legally married to that person.
(2) For the purpose of this clause, the boundaries of the various districts
shall as described hereunder and as delineated on the
plan at subclause (16) of
this clause.
area within a line commencing on coast; thence east along latitude 28 to a point
north of Tallering Peak; thence due south to
Tallering Peak; thence southeast to
Mt Gibson and Burracoppin; thence to a point southeast at the junction of
latitude 32 and longitude
119; thence south along longitude 119 to coast.
area within a line commencing on the south coast at longitude 119 then east
along the coast to longitude 123; then north along
longitude 123 to a point on
latitude 30; thence west along latitude 30 to the boundary of No. 1 District.
area within a line commencing on coast at latitude 26; thence along latitude 26
to longitude 123; thence south along longitude
123 to the boundary of No. 2
area within a line commencing on the coast at latitude 24; thence east to the
South Australian border; thence south to the coast;
thence along the coast to
longitude 123; thence north to the intersection of latitude 26; thence west
along latitude 26 to the coast.
area of the State situated between the latitude 24 and a line running east from
Carnot Bay to the Northern Territory border.
area of the State north of a line running east from Carnot Bay to the Northern
Territory border.
(3) An employee shall be paid a district allowance at the
standard rate prescribed in Column II of subclause (6) of this clause, for
district in which the employee’s headquarters is located. Provided that
where the employee's headquarters is situated in
a town or place specified in
Column III of subclause (6), the employee shall be paid a district allowance at
the rate appropriate
to that town or place as prescribed in Column IV of
subclause (6).
(4) An employee who has a dependant shall be paid double the district
allowance prescribed by subclause (3) of this clause for, the
district, town or
place in which the employee’s headquarters is located.
(5) Where an employee has a partial dependant the total district allowance
payable to the employee shall be the district allowance
prescribed by subclause
(3) of this clause plus an allowance equivalent to the difference between the
rate of district or location
allowance the partial dependant receives and the
rate of district or location allowance the partial dependant would receive if he
or she was employed in a full time capacity under the Award, Agreement or other
provision regulating the employment of the partial
(6) The weekly rate of district allowance payable to employees pursuant to
subclause (3) of this clause shall be as follows:
COLUMN I DISTRICT
COLUMN II STANDARD RATE
EXCEPTIONS TO STANDARD RATE
COLUMN IV RATE
Town or Place
Fitzroy Crossing
Halls Creek
Turner River Camp
Liveringa (Camballin)
Port Hedland
Warburton Mission
Meekatharra
Mount Magnet
Ravensthorpe
Salmon Gums
Marvel Loch
Note: In accordance with subclause (4) of this clause employees with
dependants shall be entitled to double the rate of district allowance
The allowances prescribed in this subclause shall operate from the
beginning of the first pay period commencing on or after 1 January
(7) When an employee is on approved annual recreation leave, the employee
shall for the period of such leave, be paid the district
allowance to which the
employee would ordinarily be entitled.
(8) When an employee is on long service leave or other approved leave with
pay (other than annual recreational leave), the employee
shall only be paid
district allowance for the period of such leave if the employee, dependants or
partial dependants remain in the
district in which the employee's headquarters
is situated.
(9) When an employee leaves his or her district on duty, payment of any
district allowance to which the employee would ordinarily
be entitled shall
cease after the expiration of two weeks unless the employee’s dependant/s
or partial dependant/s remain in
the district or as otherwise approved by the
(10) Except as provided in subclause (9) of this clause, a district
allowance shall be paid to any employee ordinarily entitled thereto
in addition
to reimbursement of any travelling transfer or relieving expenses or camping
(11) Where an employee whose headquarters is located in a district in
respect of which no allowance is prescribed in subclause (6)
of this clause, is
required to travel or temporarily reside for any period in excess of one month
in any district or districts in
respect of which such allowance is so payable,
the employee shall be paid for the whole of such period a district allowance at
appropriate rate pursuant to subclauses (3), (4) or (5) of this clause, for
the district in which the employee spends the greater
period of time.
(12) When an employee is provided with free board and lodging by the
employer or a Public Authority the allowance shall be reduced
to two-thirds of
the allowance the employee would ordinarily be entitled to under this clause.
(13) An employee who is employed on a part-time basis shall be entitled to
district allowance on a pro-rata basis. The allowance
shall be determined by
calculating the hours worked by the employee as a proportion of the full-time
hours prescribed by the Award
under which the employee is employed. That
proportion of the appropriate district allowance shall be payable to the
(14) An employee who immediately prior to the 1st day of July, 1988 was in
receipt of district allowance at a rate which was greater
than the amount to
which the employee is entitled under this clause shall have the difference
reduced in accordance with the following:
(i) As from the first pay period commencing on or after July 1, 1988 the
difference shall be reduced by thirty-three and one third
(33 1/3%) per cent;
(ii) As from the first pay period commencing on or after January 1, 1989
the difference remaining between the amount being paid pursuant
to (i) above and
that to which the employee is otherwise entitled under this clause shall be
reduced by fifty (50%) per cent; and
(iii) As from the first pay period commencing on or after July 1, 1989
payment shall be in accordance with the employee's entitlement
(15) The rates expressed in subclause (6) of this clause shall be adjusted
every twelve (12) months ending on December 31 in accordance
with the official
“Consumer Price Index” for Perth as published by the Australian
Bureau of Statistics.
The adjustment of rates shall be effective from the beginning of the first
pay period to commence on or after the first day of January
(16) Plan - District Allowance Boundaries
37. – DISTRICT ALLOWANCE
the purposes of this clause the following terms shall have the following
“Dependant” in relation to an employee means:
(a) a spouse; or
(b) where there is no spouse, a child or any other relative resident within
the State who relies on the employee for their main support;
who does not receive a district or location allowance of any kind.
“Partial Dependant” in relation to an employee means:
(a) a spouse; or
(b) where there is no spouse, a child or any other relative resident within
the State who relies on the employee for their main support;
who receives a district or location allowance of any kind less than that
applicable to an employee without dependants under any award,
agreement or other
provision regulating the employment of the partial dependant.
“Spouse” means an employee's spouse including de facto partner.
(2) For the purpose of this clause, the boundaries of the various districts
shall as described hereunder and as delineated on the
plan at subclause (16) of
this clause.
area within a line commencing on the coast; thence east along latitude 28 to a
point north of Tallering Peak; thence due south
to Tallering Peak; thence
southeast to Mt Gibson and Burracoppin; thence to a point southeast at the
junction of latitude 32 and
longitude 119; thence south along longitude 119 to
area within a line commencing on the coast at latitude 26; thence along latitude
26 to longitude 123; thence south along longitude
123 to the boundary of No. 2
(5) Where an employee has a partial dependant the total district allowance
payable to the employee shall be the district allowance
prescribed by subclause
(3) of this clause plus an allowance equivalent to the difference between the
rate of district or location
allowance the partial dependant receives and the
rate of district or location allowance the partial dependant would receive if
were employed in a full time capacity under the Award, Agreement or other
provision regulating the employment of the partial dependant.
(9) When an employee leaves their district on duty, payment of any district
allowance to which the employee would ordinarily be entitled
shall cease after
the expiration of two weeks unless the employee's dependant/s or partial
dependant/s remain in the district or
as otherwise approved by the employer.
NO OTHER VARIATIONS
39. - GRIEVANCE PROCEDURES
It is the intention of this Agreement to eliminate disputes which are
liable to cause stoppages for work and loss of earnings and
it is agreed between
the parties that every endeavour will be made to amicably settle any disputes
which may arise.
(1) (a) Where any grievance, dispute or claim arises an employee is
entitled to raise the matter with the appropriate Manager.
(b) If a resolution of the grievance, dispute or claim is not achieved
under subclause (1)(a) hereof, the employee concerned may refer
the matter to
his/her union representative who will discuss it with the Manager. At this point
all disputes and replies must be recorded
in the Record of Grievance book by the
Manager or Union Representative and signed by both the parties. The Union
Representative shall
receive a copy.
(c) If the matter is not satisfactorily resolved at subclause (1)(b) the
Union Representative may discuss the matter with Senior Management
officer nominated by the Manager to deal with such matters. Further comments
should be added to the Record of Grievance
Book when appropriate.
(d) If the matter is not resolved by the foregoing discussions the Union
Representative shall notify his/her union and shall thenceforth
conduct of negotiations in the hands of the union. (The Union Representative may
be employed by the union to continue negotiations).
(e) Where a matter has been referred to the union by the Union
Representative the union shall promptly take all steps necessary under
and under the
Industrial Relations Act
for the resolution of this matter. Prior
to raising the matter with the Industrial Relations Commission, the Union shall
the Department’s or Authority’s, industrial relations
branch, to try and resolve the dispute.
(2) (a) Where any grievance, dispute or claim arises, the employer is
entitled to raise the matter with the appropriate employees.
(b) If a resolution of the grievance, dispute or claim is not achieved
under subclause (2)(a) the employer shall refer the matter
to the Union
Representative.
(c) The Union Representative may discuss with the employee any grievance
referred to him/her by the employer, and if the matter is
not satisfactorily
resolved, he/she may discuss the matter with the union.
(d) If the matter is not resolved by the foregoing discussions the shop
steward shall notify his/her union and shall thenceforth leave
the conduct and
negotiations in the hands of the union. (The Union Representative may be
empowered by the union to continue negotiations).
(e) Where a matter has been referred to the union by the Union
Representative, the union shall promptly take the steps necessary under
rules and the
Industrial Relations Act
for a resolution of the matter.
(3) Where any dispute cannot be resolved by negotiation or conciliation
between the parties it is agreed that either party may refer
the matter to the
Western Australian Industrial Relations Commission.
(4) Initial replies to all written grievances and disputes must be given
within 24 hours.
38. - DISPUTE RESOLUTION PROCEDURES
It is the intention of this award to eliminate disputes which are liable to
cause stoppages for work and loss of earnings and it is
agreed between the
parties that every endeavour will be made to amicably settle any disputes which
(1) (a) Where any grievance, dispute or claim arises an employee is
entitled to raise the matter with the appropriate Manager.
(b) If a resolution of the grievance, dispute or claim is not achieved
under subclause (1)(a) hereof, the employee concerned may refer
the matter to
their Union representative who will discuss it with the Manager. At this point
all disputes and replies must be recorded
in the Record of Grievance book by the
Manager or Union Representative and signed by both the parties. The Union
Representative
shall receive a copy.
(c) If the matter is not satisfactorily resolved at subclause (1)(b) the
Union Representative may discuss the matter with Senior Management
officer nominated by the Manager to deal with such matters. Further comments
should be added to the Record of Grievance
Book when appropriate.
(d) If the matter is not resolved by the foregoing discussions the Union
Representative shall notify their Union and shall thenceforth
leave the conduct
of negotiations in the hands of the Union. (The Union Representative may be
employed by the Union to continue negotiations).
(e) Where a matter has been referred to the Union by the Union
Representative the union shall promptly take all steps necessary under
and under the
Industrial Relations Act 1979
(WA) for the resolution of
this matter. Prior to raising the matter with the Industrial Relations
Commission, the Union shall contact
the Department’s or Authority’s,
industrial relations branch, to try and resolve the dispute.
(2) (a) Where any grievance, dispute or claim arises, the employer is
entitled to raise the matter with the appropriate employees.
(b) If a resolution of the grievance, dispute or claim is not achieved
under subclause (2)(a) the employer shall refer the matter
to the Union
Representative.
(c) The Union Representative may discuss with the employee any grievance
referred to them by the employer, and if the matter is not
satisfactorily
resolved, they may discuss the matter with the Union.
(d) If the matter is not resolved by the foregoing discussions the shop
steward shall notify their Union and shall thenceforth leave
the conduct and
negotiations in the hands of the Union. (The Union Representative may be
empowered by the Union to continue negotiations).
(e) Where a matter has been referred to the union by the Union
Representative, the union shall promptly take the steps necessary
rules and the
Industrial Relations Act 1979
(WA) for a resolution of the
(3) Where any dispute cannot be resolved by negotiation or conciliation
between the parties it is agreed that either party may refer
the matter to the
Western Australian Industrial Relations Commission.
(4) Initial replies to all written grievances and disputes must be given
within 24 hours.
40. - LEAVE TO ATTEND UNION BUSINESS
(1) The employer shall grant paid leave during working hours to an
(a) who is required to give evidence before any Industrial Tribunal;
(b) who as a Union-nominated representative is required to attend
negotiations and/or conferences between the Union and the employer.
(c) when prior agreement between the Union and the employer has been
reached for the officer to attend official Union meetings preliminary
negotiations or industrial hearings;
(d) who as a Union-nominated representative is required to attend joint
Union/management consultative committees or working parties.
(2) The granting of leave pursuant to paragraph (a) of this subclause shall
only be approved:
(a) where an application for leave has been submitted by an employee a
reasonable time in advance;
(b) for the minimum period necessary to enable the Union business to be
conducted or evidence to be given;
(c) for those employees whose attendance is essential;
(d) when the operation of the organisation is not being unduly affected and
the convenience of the employer is not impaired.
(3) (a) A leave of absence provided under this clause will be granted at
the ordinary rate of pay;
(b) the employer shall not be liable for any expenses associated with an
employee attending the Union office on business;
(c) leave of absence provided under this clause shall include any necessary
travelling time in normal working hours.
(4) (a) Nothing in this clause shall diminish the existing arrangements
relating to the granting of paid leave for Union business.
(b) The provisions of this clause shall not apply to special arrangements
made between the parties which provide for unpaid leave
for employees to conduct
Union business.
(5) The provisions of this clause shall not apply when an employee is
absent from work without the approval of the employer.
RENUMBERED TO CLAUSE 39
41. – DELETED
CLAUSE DELETED
42. - TRADE UNION TRAINING LEAVE
(1) Subject to the provisions of this clause:
(a) The employer shall grant paid leave of absence to employees who are
nominated by their Union to attend short courses conducted
by the Australian
Trade Union Training Authority.
(b) Paid leave of absence shall also be granted to attend similar courses
or seminars as from time to time approved by agreement between
(2) An employee shall be granted up to a maximum of five days’ paid
leave per calendar year for trade union training or similar
courses or seminars
as approved. However, leave of absence in excess of five days and up to ten
days may be granted in any one calendar
year provided that the total leave being
granted in that year and in the subsequent year does not exceed ten days.
(3) (a) Leave of absence will be granted at the ordinary rate of pay and
shall not include shift allowances, penalty rates or overtime.
(b) Where a public holiday or rostered day off (including a rostered day
off as a result of working a 38 hour week) falls during the
duration of a
course, a day off in lieu of that day will not be granted.
(4) Subject to subclause (3) of this clause shift workers attending a
course shall be deemed to have worked the shifts they would
have worked had
leave not been taken to attend the course.
(5) The granting of leave pursuant to the provisions of subclause (1) of
this clause is subject to the operation of the organisation
not being unduly
affected and to the convenience of the employer.
(6) (a) Any application by an employee shall be submitted to the employer
for approval at least four weeks before the commencement
of the course, provided
that the employer may agree to a lesser period of notice.
(b) All applications for leave shall be accompanied by a statement from the
relevant Union indicating that the employee has been nominated
for the course.
The application shall provide details as to the subject, commencement date,
length of course, venue and the Authority
which is conducting the course.
(7) A qualifying period of 12 months in government employment shall be
served before an employee is eligible to attend courses or
seminars of more than
one-half day duration. An employer may, where special circumstances exist,
approve an application to attend
a course or seminar where an employee has less
than 12 months’ government service.
(8) (a) The employer shall not be liable for any expenses associated with
an employee’s attendance at trade union training courses.
(b) Leave of absence granted under this clause shall include any necessary
travelling time in normal working hours immediately before
or after the
RENUMBERED TO CLAUSE 40
Change the reference to ‘Australian Trade Union Training
Authority’ in subclause (1)(a) to ‘Australian Trade Union
Institute’.
43. - PAID LEAVE FOR ENGLISH LANGUAGE TRAINING
(1) Leave during normal working hours without loss of pay shall be granted
to employees from a non-English speaking background, who
are unable to meet
standards of communication to advance career prospects, or who constitute a
safety hazard or risk to themselves
and/or fellow workers, or are not able to
meet the accepted production requirements of that particular occupation or
industry, to
attend English training conducted by an approved and authorised
Authority. The selection of employees for training will be determined
consultation between the employer and the appropriate Union(s).
(2) Leave will be granted to enable employees selected to achieve an
acceptable level or vocational English proficiency. In this
respect the tuition
content with specific aims and objectives incorporating the pertinent factors at
subclause (3) hereof shall be
agreed between the employer, the Union(s), and the
Adult Migrant Education Service or other approved Authority conducting the
(3) Subject to appropriate needs assessment participation in training will
be on the basis of minimum of 100 hours per employee per
The agreed desired proficiency level will take account of the vocational
needs of an employee in respect of communication, safety,
welfare, and
productivity within his/her current position as well as those positions to which
he/she may be considered for promotion
or redeployment. It will also take
account of issues in relation to training, retraining and multi-skilling, award
restructuring,
industrial relations and safety provisions, and equal opportunity
employment legislation.
RENUMBERED TO CLAUSE 41
(3) Subject to appropriate needs assessment participation in training will
be on the basis of minimum of 100 hours per employee per
The agreed desired proficiency level will take account of the vocational
needs of an employee in respect of communication, safety,
welfare, and
productivity within the employees’ current position as well as those
positions to which the employee may be considered
for promotion or redeployment.
It will also take account of issues in relation to training, retraining and
multi-skilling, award
restructuring, industrial relations and safety provisions,
and equal opportunity employment legislation.
44. - ENTERPRISE FLEXIBILITY
(1) Employers and employees covered by this award may establish/negotiate
and reach agreement to apply to vary any provision of this
award so as to make
the enterprise or workplace operate more efficiently according to its particular
(2) To facilitate this process, each enterprise or workplace shall
establish consultative mechanisms and procedures appropriate to
the organisation
comprising representatives of the employer and the employees.
(3) Employees may seek advice from, or request to be represented by, the
union party to this award during the negotiations.
(4) Where agreement is reached at an enterprise or workplace and where
giving effect to such agreement requires this award, as it
applies at the
enterprise or workplace, to be varied, an application to vary the award shall be
made to the Commission.
(5) A copy of the agreement shall be made available in writing to all
employees at the enterprise or workplace and to the union party
(6) The union shall not unreasonably oppose the application to vary the
award to give effect to the terms of the agreement.
(7) When this award is varied to give effect to an agreement made pursuant
to this clause the variation shall become a schedule to
this award and the
variation shall take precedence over any provision of this award to the extent
of any expressly identified inconsistency.
(8) The agreement must meet the following requirements to enable the
Commission to vary this award to give effect to it -
(a) that the purpose of the agreement is to make the enterprise or
workplace operate more efficiently according to its particular
(b) that the majority of employees covered by the agreement genuinely agree
(c) that the award variation necessitated by the agreement meets the
requirements of the
Industrial Relations Act, 1979
and relevant Wage Fixing
Principles.
(9) Nothing in this clause shall be taken as limiting the right of any
party to apply to give effect to an enterprise agreement under
provisions of the
Industrial Relations Act, 1979
CLAUSE DELETED
APPENDIX - RESOLUTION OF DISPUTES REQUIREMENTS
(1) This Appendix is inserted into the award/industrial agreement as a
result of legislation which came into effect on 16 January
1996 (Industrial
Relations Legislation Amendment and Repeal Act 1995) and further varied by
legislation which came into effect on
23 May 1997 (Labour Relations Legislation
Amendment Act 1997).
(2) Any dispute or grievance procedure in this award/industrial agreement
shall also apply to any questions, disputes or difficulties
which may arise
(3) With effect from 22 November 1997 the dispute or grievance procedures
in this award/industrial agreement is hereby varied to include
the requirement
that persons involved in the question, dispute or difficulty will confer among
themselves and make reasonable attempts
to resolve questions, disputes or
difficulties before taking those matters to the Commission.
APPENDIX DELETED
SCHEDULE A - NAMED UNION PARTY
United Voice WA
SCHEDULE A - NAMED UNION PARTY
United Workers Union (WA)
SCHEDULE B - RESPONDENTS
The Minister for Primary Industry
The Minister for Community
Development
The Minister for Education
The Minister for Health
Minister for Labour Relations
The Minister for Lands
The Minister for
Environment
The Minister for Police
The Minister for Planning
Minister for Transport
The Minister for Works
The Minister for Water
The Minister for Aboriginal Affairs
The Attorney
Commissioner for Main Roads
The State Government Printer
Government Insurance Commission
Western Australian Fire Brigades
Western Australian Museum Board
SCHEDULE B – RESPONDENTS
Department of Primary Industry and Regional Development
Department of
Communities
Department of Education
Department of Health
Department of
Premier and Cabinet
Department of Water and Environmental
Department of Finance
Department of Treasury
The Minister
Department of Local Government Sports and Cultural Industries
Department of Fire and Emergency Services
Department of
Department of Planning Lands and Heritage
Department of
Western Australia Police Force
Commissioner of Main Roads
Law Publisher
Insurance Commission of Western Australia
APPENDIX - S.49B - INSPECTION OF RECORDS
REQUIREMENTS
(1) Where this award, order or industrial agreement empowers a
representative of an organisation of employees party to this award,
industrial agreement to inspect the time and wages records of an employee or
former employee, that power shall be exercised
subject to the Industrial
Relations (General) Regulations 1997 (as may be amended from time to time) and
the following:
(a) The employer may refuse the representative access to the records if:
(i) the employer is of the opinion that access to the records by the
representative of the organisation would infringe the privacy
of persons who are
not members of the organisation; and
(ii) the employer undertakes to produce the records to an Industrial
Inspector within 48 hours of being notified of the requirement
to inspect by the
representative.
(b) The power of inspection may only be exercised by a representative of an
organisation of employees authorised for the purpose in
accordance with the
rules of the organisation.
(c) Before exercising a power of inspection, the representative shall give
reasonable notice of not less than 24 hours to an employer.
APPENDIX DELETED
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (0.986 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter