URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WASTR/2004/48.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:08:57
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
The Owners of Seacrest Retirement Village - Strata Plan 17670 and Cosgrave & Anor [2004] WASTR 48 (7 September 2004)
OFFICE OF THE STRATA TITLES REFEREE
Strata Titles Act 1985
THE OWNERS OF SEACREST RETIREMENT VILLAGE - STRATA PLAN
17670 and COSGRAVE & ANOR
[2004] WASTR 48
MR R J KRONBERGER (REFEREE)
DELIVERED :
7 SEPTEMBER 2004
FILE NO/S :
ST 94 of 2004
THE OWNERS OF SEACREST RETIREMENT VILLAGE - STRATA PLAN
WILIAM JOSEPH COSGRAVE
CHERYL THERESA ANNE COSGRAVE
Respondents
Catchwords:
Real property - Strata titles - structural alterations
Legislation:
Application dismissed
Representation:
Applicant : In person
Respondents : In person
Solicitors:
Applicant : In person
Respondents : In person
Case(s) referred to in decision(s):
Case(s) also cited:
OFFICE OF THE STRATA TITLES
Strata Titles Act 1985
THE OWNERS OF SEACREST RETIREMENT VILLAGE - STRATA PLAN
17670 and COSGRAVE & ANOR
MR R J KRONBERGER (REFEREE)
DELIVERED :
7 SEPTEMBER 2004
FILE NO/S :
ST 94 of 2004
STRATA PLAN NO
THE OWNERS OF SEACREST RETIREMENT VILLAGE - STRATA PLAN
WILIAM JOSEPH COSGRAVE
CHERYL THERESA ANNE COSGRAVE
Respondents
Catchwords:
Real property - Strata titles - structural alterations
Legislation:
Application dismissed
Representation:
Applicant : In person
Respondents : In person
Solicitors:
Applicant : In person
Respondents : In person
Case(s) referred to in decision(s):
Case(s) also cited:
REASONS FOR DECISION – INTERIM
1 Alteration to a lot and resultant noise
transmission.
2 The Applicant is "The Owners of Seacrest Retirement Village – Strata
Plan 17670" ("the Strata Company").
Strata Plan
and relevant Act
3 Strata Plan 17670 ("the Strata Plan") was registered on 4 December 1989
pursuant to the
Strata Titles Act 1985
") which continues
to be the relevant Act.
4 In these Reasons, unless otherwise specified, all references to sections and
Schedules are, respectively, references to sections
of and Schedules to the
5 The parcel is a 169-lot brick and tile residential complex situated at
Marmion Avenue, Sorrento.
6 The lots are contained in a number of two-storey buildings.
7 Each lot contains residential portions and car parking
Address for service
8 According to the Strata Plan, the address for serving notices on the Strata
Company is C/- Roy Weston Nationwide, 4 Thelma Street
Orders sought
9 The Applicant has sought a Final Order and, pending my determination of the
application for that Order, has also sought an Interim
Final Order sought
10 The Applicant has sought a Final Order in the following
"Within 30 days from the day this order takes effect, the proprietor of Lot 73
shall carpet, at his own cost, all stairs and landings
within Lot 73. The carpet
shall be of a specification to the satisfaction of the council of the strata
company and shall be installed
by an experienced and reputable carpet
Interim Order
11 The Applicant has sought an Interim Order in the following
"The proprietor of Lot 73 shall provide to the secretary of the strata company
written advice within 7 days of the date this interim
order takes effect about
whether they have in place public liability insurance policy covering that part
of Lot 73 comprising the
stairs and landings as required by the covenants of the
registered easement over Lot 73 and 75".
Lots 73 and 75
13 The proprietors of Lot 73 on the Strata Plan are William Joseph
Cosgrave and Cheryl Theresa Anne Cosgrave ("the Respondents").
14 The proprietor of Lot 75 on the Strata Plan is Shoal Pty Ltd.
15 One of the buildings in the scheme contains Lots 72 and 74 on the ground
floor and, directly above them, respectively, Lots 73
and 75 on the first
16 On the ground floor plan of the Strata Plan, between Lots 72 and 74, there
is an area of 29m
, described as "stairwell".
17 On the first floor plan of the Strata Plan, between Lots 73 and 75, above
the stairwell, is an area which is slightly smaller
than the stairwell and which
is marked "void".
18 Both the stairwell and the void are shown as parts of Lot 73. No floor area
is shown in respect of the first floor void area.
19 It appears that the only access to Lot 75 is through the stairwell and the
void (together "the accessway") that form part of
Retirement Village
20 On 5 January
1994, Memorial F414493
was recorded on the Strata Plan,
pursuant to
Retirement Villages Act 1992
. However, the
Memorial relates only to Lot 131 on the Strata Plan.
21 Although the name of the scheme incorporates the words "Retirement Village",
there is nothing in the application which indicates
that the scheme is a
"retirement village" as defined in
Retirement Villages
The Memorial referred to above does not assist in
identifying the scheme as a retirement village. Accordingly, this application is
being dealt with under the provisions of the
22 When the Strata Plan was registered in 1989, its by-laws were, pursuant to
(as worded prior to the
Strata Titles Amendment Act
the "standard" by-laws in Parts I and II of Sch 1.
Schedule 2 contained a set of "Optional Additional By-laws", which the
Strata Company
adopted in 1994.
23 Notification F414493, noted on the Strata Plan on 5 January 1994, records
the adoption, as additions to the Sch 1, Part II by-laws,
all of the optional
additional by-laws that were set out in Sch 2. There were, initially, 3 by-laws
in Sch 1, Part II, and 12 optional
additional by-laws in Sch 2. The new
Sch 1, Part II by-laws that were adopted in 1994 were in the same terms as
to 12 inclusive but they were re-numbered 4 to 15
inclusive, to enable them to be added to the Sch 1, Part II by-laws.
time, new by-laws 16 to 20 inclusive were added to Sch 1, Part II.
Strata Titles Amendment Act 1995
repealed and re-enacted
ss 42(1) and (2). Section 42(2) now provides that the by-laws in both Sch 1
and Sch 2 are deemed
by-laws of a strata company, unless and
until amended, repealed or added to. Schedule 1 by-laws may only be amended,
added to by a resolution without dissent. A Sch 2 by-law may be
amended, repealed or added to by a special resolution.
25 In the present case, there may be some confusion about what kind of
resolution would be necessary to amend a Sch 1, Part II by-law
which is in the
same terms as a Sch 2 by-law. The Strata Company may wish to seek advice on
clarifying that issue.
26 The transitional provisions in Sch 3, cl 12 also have some
relevance to the by-laws.
27 The "registered easement" referred to in the Interim Order sought is an
Easement recorded in Transfer E249064 on 12 July 1990,
when Lot 73 was
transferred by its then registered proprietor, Rhodgkin Pty Ltd, to Donald
Wilfred Dennis and Elizabeth Marie Dennis.
The Easement reserves, to Rhodgkin
Pty Ltd and to its successors in title to Lot 75 , in common with Mr and Mrs
Dennis and to their
successors in title to Lot 73, the right,
"...at all times ... by day or night for the purpose of obtaining access to and
from the common property on Strata Plan 17670 but
not for any other purpose
whatsoever to pass and repass over in and along that portion of the land...being
those parts of Lot 73
... as are marked "stairwell" on Sheet 1C of Strata Plan
17670 and marked "void" on Sheet 2C of that Strata Plan (hereinafter referred
"the accessway")".
28 Since March 2004, the proprietor of Lot 75 has been Shoal Pty Ltd and
since November 2003 the proprietors of Lot 73 have
been The Respondents
29 28 The Easement includes:
"5. If the (
) ...does not for any reason effect insurance in accordance with
Strata Titles Act 1985
Respondents
) shall take out and
at all times keep in force a public liability policy with a cover of not less
than $750 000 or such greater amount
as the strata company may resolve or as may
be applicable pursuant to
Strata Titles Act 1985
Respondents
) shall maintain the accessway in good order and
condition (fair wear and tear and perils not covered by any policy of insurance
8.(a) If the strata company does not for any reason do so, the
Respondents
) shall take out and at all times keep in force a policy or
policies of insurance to cover the accessway and all fixtures and fittings
therein against loss or damage by fire, fusion, explosion, smoke, lightning,
flood, storm, tempest, rainwater, commotion, malicious
damage, impact by
vehicles, sprinkler leakage, water damage, aircraft and articles dropped
therefrom and insurances in respect of
architects' and other consultants' fees
and the cost of demolition and removal of debris for the full replacement value
thereof ..."
30 The Easement also contains a covenant, by the Respondents, as the
proprietors of Lot 73, to keep the accessway clear and rubbish
free and to pay
to the proprietor of Lot 75, upon demand, one half of the insurance premium
referred to in cls 5 and 8 of the
"...insofar as those premiums exceed the premiums which would be payable if the
Respondents
) only effected such insurance in respect of (
) other than the accessway and one half of all the reasonable costs and
expenses paid or incurred by (
) in respect of the proper maintenance
and repair of the accessway which maintenance and repair shall be carried out by
) as and when (
) consider necessary PROVIDED THAT
) shall first obtain the written approval of the (
proprietor of
that proprietor
) does not so approve then the
matter shall be referred for final determination to a member of the council of
the strata company nominated
by the Chairman for the time being and both the
( Respondents
the proprietor
) agree that
they shall both be bound by the decision of such nominee".
Applicant's
submissions
31 On 3 February 2004, a Ms Lisa Paradiso of the Heath Lambert Group,
apparently the Applicant's insurance broker, reported to the
Applicant, in
relation to the tiling of the stairs of the accessway by the Respondents.
"I have finally received a response from your insurers regarding the following -
If tiles replace carpet, then the tiles will be covered under the body corporate
building policy with CHU.
If the body corporate agrees to the change, then you need to ensure the tiles
are non-slip and suitable for the type of residence
(sic) who may walk on the
tiles, bearing in mind that they may use walking assistance apparatus. Any legal
liability resulting from
the tiles would be the responsibility of the body
corporate unless the body corporate advises in writing that they do not agree to
the replacement and the owner proceeds at their own risk, then they would not be
covered by the building policy".
32 It is not clear from the submissions whether the carpets which originally
covered the stairs and the accessway were replaced
with floor tiles before or
after that report, but on 5 February 2004 the Strata Company wrote to the
Respondents, referring them
to Sch 2, by-law 13 which
"A proprietor of a lot shall not alter the structure of the lot except as may be
permitted and provided for under the Act and the
by-laws and in any event shall
not alter the structure of the lot without giving to the strata company, not
later than 14 before
commencement of the alteration, a written notice describing
the proposed alteration".
33 On 8 March 2004, Shoal Pty Ltd’s managing agent, wrote to the Strata
Company, indicating that, by that date, the tiles
had been installed by the
Respondents, resulting in increased noise levels. The issue of noise had been
raised even before the tiles
were installed. The letter stated that the noise in
"...is accentuated due to the echo chamber of the tiled
34 The letter reported that the Respondents, as the occupants of Lot 73, had
been unsympathetic to complaints about the noise.
35 On 22 March 2004, the Strata Company wrote to the Respondents advising that
the tiles they had installed in the "atrium" of villas
73-75, were laid without
Strata Company approval and that the tiles
"...either must be removed and/or covered by carpet, at your
36 On 22 March 2004, the Respondents' solicitors wrote to the Strata Company
seeking a meeting to try to resolve the issue.
37 The Strata Company's response of 26 March 2004
"Mr and Mrs Cosgrave have not replied to any of our correspondence regarding the
matter of alterations carried out by them to the
atrium lot without approval and
contrary to the By-laws of the Strata Company and which has likely interfered
with our public insurance
Until Mr and Mrs Cosgrave undertake to remedy those works as required by the
Strata Company, we consider it pointless to proceed
with any form of mediation
38 On 3 April 2004, the Strata Company wrote to a real estate agency, David
Evans Real Estate, noting that that agency was involved
in a proposed sale of
the Respondents' Lot 73. The letter pointed out that the stairway in question
had been tiled without the Strata
Company's approval, contrary to the Strata
Company's by-laws and concluding
"We consider the area has become hazardous and request that, before any sale is
undertaken, the steps and landings in the atrium
be covered by carpet at owners'
39 Early in March 2004, the Respondents had written to the Department of
Consumer and Employment Protection complaining about aspects
of the management
of the scheme. On 20 April 2004, the Strata Company responded to a letter from
the Department. The response included
"Our behaviour towards Cosgrave was entirely business-like yet courteous.
Cosgrave carried out works to the atrium lot which they
own over which an
easement in favour of a neighbour has been granted. These works, consisting of
removal of carpet and replacing
with tiles, were contrary to our strict
instructions not to proceed and the requirements provided within the
. The installation of the tiles has provided a slippery surface more
prone to causing accidents and appear to have negated the public
insurance over that lot... there have been two letters to Cosgrave none of which
has been replied to".
40 On 22 May 2004, the Strata Company wrote to the Respondents again requesting
compliance with the Strata Company's earlier request
relating to the covering of
the stairs.
41 The Applicant has stated expressly that it is not seeking to have the tiles
removed from the stairway and landing, but requires
those areas to returned
close to the original state by recarpeting to ensure safety and to reduce noise
penetration and that
"there is concern that there is no public liability insurance cover for this
area. Recognising that the area is not common property
and is part of the
respondent's lot the requirement is that the respondents seek appropriate
insurance cover. If there is no cover,
the strata company will endeavour to
extend the strata company's policy to that part of Lot 73. However, as per the
broker's letter,
the insurer may refuse cover whilst the stairs and landing
remain uncovered
Considerations
entitles me to make as an Interim Order any order that I may make
with respect to the application for a Final Order, if I am satisfied,
reasonable grounds, that by reason of the urgent circumstances of the case, I
should do so.
43 For the purposes of the Interim Order, it appears to me that the
installation of floor tiling in place of carpet has cast doubt
insurance cover in respect of claimable events in those areas on the basis that
the stairs as so altered may have created
a greater risk than previously
44 However, the obligation on the Respondents to effect the public liability
insurance cover referred to in cl 5 of the Easement
only arises if the
Strata Company
"does not for any reason effect insurance in accordance with
Strata Titles Act
45 The information provided by the Strata Company discloses that such an
insurance policy has been effected.
46 I note that, the Easement was executed in 1989. At that time
referred to a "public risk" cover of $750 000
Section 55(1)(c)
that such cover was not compulsory unless, pursuant to
"...the strata company otherwise resolves by unanimous resolution, in respect of
damage to property, death or bodily injury for which
the strata company could
become liable in damages".
47 However,
provided that
"A resolution of a strata company under subsection (1) (c) shall cease to have
effect if a proprietor at any time after the passing
of that resolution serves
notice in writing upon the strata company that he requires the strata company to
effect insurance in accordance
with subsection (1) (c)".
Section 55(1)(c)
was amended by the
Strata Titles Amendment Act 1995,
making public risk cover of not less than $5 000 000 compulsory, unless an
exemption was granted generally, or in any particular respect,
by a referee's
order under a new section, s 103J.
49 As I am not aware of any application for an Order under s 103J in
respect of the scheme, the Strata Company is obliged to
in place the
insurance cover referred to in the amended s 55(1)(c).
50 This is the insurance cover specified in cl 5 of the Easement. I have not
been advised of any failure by the Respondents to effect
the insurance cover
referred to in cl 8 of the Easement.
51 If the Strata Company has not taken out insurance cover in respect to the
property damage risks referred to in cl 8(a),
the Respondents
are obliged
to do so. If the Respondents do effect that cover because the Strata Company has
failed to do so, the
Respondents are
entitled, under cl 3(b) of the
Easement, to recover part of the premium from Shoal Pty Ltd as the proprietor
52 If the Strata Company has taken out the required cover and its insurer is
prepared to accept any change in the risk that could
arise from the change in
floor coverings in the accessway, then the floor tiling will not affect the
Strata Company.
53 If the insurer is prepared to accept any change in that risk, but only on
the basis of an addition to the premium payable, s
55A may have some relevance.
It provides that
"(1) If any part of an insurance premium payable
by a strata company is attributable solely to the risk associated with
carried on on a lot, the proprietor of that lot is liable to pay to
the strata company on demand an amount
54 The change from carpet to tiles in the accessway may have involved works of
a structural kind to the lot, but there is nothing
in the material presented to
me to indicate that they were works which involved any part of the common
property.The works in question
appear to have been carried out entirely within
55 The approval requirements for the erection of any "structure" or any
alteration of a structural kind to or extension of a "structure"
within a lot
are covered by s 7 and related sections. The term "structure" is defined in
reg 32 of the
Strata Titles General Regulations 1996
"any dwelling, shop, factory, commercial premises, garage, carport or other
building or improvement
(a) the construction or
erection of which is required to be approved by the local government or any
other authority ..."
56 If the works in question, within Lot 73, are “structural”,
within that definition, then an application to the Strata
Company would have
been necessary – see
and s 7B – but I have not been
provided with sufficient information in that regard.
57 The issue of noise transmission from one lot to another is an issue that
directly involves only the affected lot and the lot
from which the noise is
transmitted – see Sch 2, by-law 10, although
obligation on the Strata Company to enforce the by-laws. Section 82 requires an
Interim Order to correspond directly with
a Final Oder sought in the same
application. In the present case, the Final Order sought differs significantly
from the Interim Order
59 I do not consider that it is appropriate to make the Interim Order
60 My decision on the Final Order sought will be deferred pending receipt of
any submissions in response to this application.
Interim Order
61 My Order is that
The application for an Interim Order be
DATED 7 September 2004
_________________________________
RJ KRONBERGER
STRATA TITLES REFEREE
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (95.5 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter