URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WADC/2025/73.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:02:51
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
DONALDSON -v- NURSE [2025] WADC 73 (22 October 2025)
DISTRICT COURT OF WESTERN
DONALDSON -v- NURSE
[2025] WADC 73
SHEPHERD DCJ
1 & 3 OCTOBER 2024
DELIVERED :
22 OCTOBER 2025
FILE NO/S :
CIV 385 of 2022
SHAUN PETER DONALDSON
MICHAEL JOHN NURSE
FILE NO/S :
CIV 1904 of 2022
MICHAEL JOHN NURSE
SHAUN PETER DONALDSON
Catchwords:
Negligence - Personal injuries - Determination
of liability - Motorcycle collision - Evidence - Expert evidence - Accident
reconstruction
- Contributory negligence - Turns on own facts
Legislation:
Civil Liability Act 2002
Evidence Act 1906
Judgment for the plaintiff (CIV 385 of
Plaintiff's claim dismissed (CIV 1904 of 2022)
Representation:
CIV 385 of 2022
Mr N F Morrissey
Mr D R Clyne
Solicitors:
Percy Kakulas Gleeson
Simon Walters
CIV 1904 of 2022
Mr D R Clyne
Mr N F Morrissey
Solicitors:
Simon Walters
Percy Kakulas Gleeson
Case(s) referred to in decision(s):
Adeels Palace Pty Ltd v Moubarak
[2009] HCA 48
(2009) 239 CLR
Allied Pumps Pty Ltd v Hooker
[2020] WASCA 72
Apostolic Church Australia Limited v Dixon
[2018] WASCA 146
Astley v Austrust Ltd
[1999] HCA 6
(1999) 197 CLR 1
Axon v Axon
[1937] HCA 80
(1937) 59 CLR 395
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
Brown v New South Wales Trustee and Guardian
[2012] NSWCA 431
CGU Insurance Ltd v Coote (by his Next Friend Stephen Desmond Coote)
Commissioner for Railways v Ruprecht
[1979] HCA 37
(1979) 142 CLR 563
Cox v Fellows
[2013] NSWCA 206
Department of Housing and Works v Smith [No 2]
[2010] WASCA 25
D'Souza v Barclays Building Services (WA) Pty Ltd
[2020] WADC 87
EDWF Holdings 1 Pty Ltd v EDWF Holdings 2 Pty Ltd
[2010] WASCA 78
Erickson v Bagley
[2015] VSCA 220
Gordon v Truong
[2014] NSWCA 97
(2014) 66 MVR 241
Hunter and New England Local Health District v McKenna
[2014] HCA 44
253 CLR 270
Kazal v Thunder Studios Inc (California)
[2023] FCAFC 174
King v Nash
[2022] WASC 102
Koehler v Cerebos (Australia) Ltd
[2005] HCA 15
(2005) 222 CLR 44
Kuligowski v Metrobus
[2004] HCA 34
(2004) 220 CLR 363
Lehrmann v Network Ten Pty Ltd (Trial Judgment)
[2024] FCA 369
Lightfoot v Rockingham Wild Encounters Pty Ltd
[2018] WASCA 205
NOM v Director of Public Prosecutions
[2012] VSCA 198
(2012) 38 VR 618
O'Connor v Insurance Commission of Western Australia
[2016] WASCA 95
Perisher Blue Pty Ltd v Nair-Smith
[2015] NSWCA 90
(2015) 90 NSWLR 1
Podrebersek v Australian Iron & Steel Pty Ltd
[1985] HCA 34
59 ALJR 492
Rhesa Shipping Co SA v Edmunds
[1985] 1 WLR 948
Roads and Traffic Authority of NSW v Dederer
[2007] HCA 42
(2007) 234 CLR
Shaw v Thomas
[2010] NSWCA 169
State of New South Wales v Fahy
[2007] HCA 20
(2007) 232 CLR 486
Stenning v Sanig
[2015] NSWCA 214
Summit Rural (WA) Pty Ltd v Lenane Holdings Pty Ltd
[2024] WASCA 122
Sungravure Pty Ltd v Meani
[1964] HCA 16
(1964) 110 CLR 24
Tapp v Australian Bushmen's Campdraft & Rodeo Association Ltd
(2022) 273 CLR 454
Town of Port Hedland v Reece William Hodder by Next Friend Elaine Georgina
Hodder [No 2]
[2012] WASCA 212
Vairy v Wyong Shire Council
[2005] HCA 62
(2005) 223 CLR 422
Wallace v Kam
[2013] HCA 19
(2013) 250 CLR 375
Water Board v Moustakas
[1988] HCA 12
(1998) 180 CLR 491
Waverley Council v Ferreria
[2005] NSWCA 418
Wilson v Nilepac Pty Ltd t/as Vision Personal Training (Crows Nest)
Wyong Shire Council v Shirt
[1980] HCA 12
(1980) 146 CLR 40
Table of Contents
INTRODUCTION
the early hours of 12 September 2020 two men of dubious moral character met
under cover of darkness at the Dianella Plaza car
park. That meeting had
everything to do with illicit drugs and nothing to do with motorcycles.
conducted their business, both men then left the Dianella Plaza car park on
their respective motorcycles and headed southbound
along Alexander Drive towards
the freeway. At a point north of where Alexander Drive intersects with
Thongsbridge Street, Alexander
Drive curves into a right-hand bend, demarcated
by a guardrail and a black and white, reflective arrow sign.
the approach to the bend the two motorcycles collided, became destabilised,
capsized and crashed into the guardrail. Both men
were thrown from
their motorcycles.
Mr Donaldson
was thrown over the guardrail with catastrophic consequences. He is now a
paraplegic.
was thrown from his motorcycle landing on the road in the left lane of Alexander
Drive. He was also injured, although to
a lesser extent than
Mr Donaldson.
man has brought a separate action against the other in
negligence.
asserts that the other rode his motorcycle in a manner that was negligent. Each
man pleads contributory negligence in
respect of the other. Each man asserts
that the negligence of the other caused the injuries to the other.
matter was before me for determination of liability only.
Mr Donaldson and Mr Nurse gave evidence at trial. The evidence
of each served as his evidence in support of his claim against
the other, and as
evidence of his defence in the claim against him.
Mr Donaldson's
position in short, was that he was travelling in the left lane driving south
along Alexander Drive when, on the approach
to the bend and without warning,
Mr Nurse overtook him from the right-hand side, cutting directly across
Mr Donaldson's line of travel
at such proximity that the two motorcycles
Mr Donaldson's
position at trial was that as a consequence of Mr Nurse's manner of
driving, the right-hand side of his front wheel
impacted with the left-hand side
of Mr Nurse's rear wheel, causing Mr Donaldson to lose control of
his motorcycle, crashing into
the barrier ('Hypothesis One',
'Mr Donaldson's position').
position at trial was that he was travelling southbound in the left lane of
Alexander Drive in front of Mr Donaldson when
Mr Donaldson suddenly,
and without warning, struck the rear wheel of Mr Nurse's motorcycle from
Mr Nurse's right-hand side (and/or
from behind), causing Mr Nurse to
lose control of his motorcycle, crashing into the barrier front-on ('Hypothesis
Two', 'Mr Nurse's
position').
Mr Donaldson
called evidence from Professor Anderson, an expert in accident
reconstruction. Professor Anderson's qualifications,
expertise and the
methodology he employed in reconstructing the accident were not challenged at
trial. His opinions and conclusions
were largely unchallenged at trial and the
report he prepared on instructions from Mr Donaldson's solicitors was
tendered by consent
narrow area of challenge to Professor Anderson's evidence related to the
mechanics of the interaction between Mr Donaldson's
motorcycle and
Mr Nurse's motorcycle prior to each colliding with the barrier.
Specifically, whether Hypothesis One, or Mr Donaldson's
account of the
collision between the two motorcycles, is inconsistent with the physical damage
sustained by Mr Nurse's Honda following
its impact with the barrier and is
otherwise inconsistent with other aspects of the crash scene.
generally, later in these
were many similarities between Mr Donaldson and Mr Nurse. Neither man
came before the court as a person of prior good character.
Both men have
extensive criminal histories, at the time of the accident each man was riding
his motorcycle without a valid driver's
licence, each man tested positive after
the accident to methylamphetamine and amphetamine in differing amounts, and each
man subsequently
pleaded guilty to driving at the time of the accident with a
prescribed illicit substance.
is trite to say that both men have credibility issues.
I do not accept the entirety of the evidence that either man gave, in respect of
Mr Donaldson, I am able to accept parts of
his evidence. The same cannot
be said for Mr Nurse. With one very narrow exception, I conclude that
false in one thing does mean
false in everything.
the reasons that follow, I find for Mr Donaldson and I dismiss
Mr Nurse's claim.
matter can now be programmed for an assessment of
OVERVIEW OF THE CRASH SCENE
2.1 Overview of the crash scene
Drive is a dual carriageway heading south. The crash location was on a bend in
the road ('the bend') along Alexander Drive
northwards of, and proximate to,
where Alexander Drive intersects with Thongsbridge Street ('the Thongsbridge
Street intersection').
to the bend, Alexander Drive is a straight road of nearly 500 m. The bend
is located approximately 340 m south-west of the
intersection with Bradford
stretch of road heading southbound along Alexander Drive on the approach to the
bend is clearly visible. Whilst there are some
trees on the median strip
between the southbound and northbound lanes, they do not obstruct the view
of the road heading south.
whilst the aerial
depict some
trees further south along Alexander Drive, there is nothing from the photographs
of the crash scene to suggest that those
trees (or anything) obstructed the view
that a road user would have on the approach to the bend. That observation
is consistent
with the evidence led at trial.
two photographs below
depict the dual carriageway of Alexander Drive looking southbound towards the
Thongsbridge Street intersection.
Photograph 2
is plain from viewing the photographs of the crash scene is that immediately to
the south side of Thongsbridge Street, that
part of the bend in the road is
demarcated by a guardrail and black and white, reflective arrow sign.
south along Alexander Drive, the guardrail and the arrow sign can readily be
seen, even from some distance away from the
commencement of the bend. None of
that is controversial.
the intersection, the arrow sign and the guardrail clearly demarcate a certain
part of the bend, what is clear from the scene
photographs
Alexander Drive commences to bend to the right prior to, or north of, the
Thongsbridge Street intersection.
a plain viewing of the photographs, I would estimate the distance at which
Alexander Drive commences to bend to the right as
being approximately
30 m - 50 m to the north of the Thongsbridge Street
intersection. This is an approximate estimate only using
the scale provided on
photographs tendered at
commonsense. Nothing turns on the precise measurement.
2.2 The location of the alleged negligent acts of driving
to where on Alexander Drive each Party alleges the other rode his motorcycle
negligently, I refer briefly to the pleadings. Mr
Donaldson's pleaded
position is that Mr Nurse's act (or acts) of negligent driving occurred
as Mr Donaldson navigated the right bend adjacent to the intersection
of Alexander Drive and Thongsbridge
pleaded position is that Mr Nurse was '
involved in a collision at or
around the intersection of Alexander Drive and Thongsbridge
the context of two motorcycles that were then travelling, it is understandable
that the precise location of where the negligent
acts of driving are said to
have occurred is referred to generally by reference to the intersection and/or
was common ground at trial that at a point along Alexander Drive north of the
Thongsbridge Street intersection there was an interaction
between the front
wheel of Mr Donaldson's motorcycle and the rear wheel of Mr Nurse's
motorcycle. For ease of reference I will refer
to point at which the
motorcycles collided as 'the collision'.
was not contentious at trial that the motorcycles destabilised upon, or
immediately following, the collision. Both men then lost
control of their
motorcycles, they capsized and then slid into the barrier, impacting with the
guardrail. I will refer to the point
at which each motorcycle subsequently
impacted with the guardrail as 'the impact with the guardrail' or 'the impact
with the barrier'.
is necessary to delineate the two physical acts in order to understand the
sequence of events and to understand the expert evidence.
way the trial was conducted by both Parties was that the manner of negligent
driving alleged by each man against the other occurred
immediately prior to the
stretch of road where the acts of negligent driving are alleged to have occurred
can therefore be narrowed down by reference
to the likely point of the
is best illustrated by Photograph
which is an
aerial view of Alexander Drive. It is marked by two yellow lines which
yellow line closest to the guardrail indicates the straight line towards the
point of impact.
The northern-most yellow line indicates the tangent to the beginning of the
3 is also marked by a 10-m black line which intersects with the tangent to the
beginning of the curve.
area of road where the two motorcycles collided was somewhere along the 10-m
stretch of road as depicted by the black line.
Specifically, where the black
and yellow lines intersect, possibly slightly before (or to the north, or the
right, looking at Photograph
was not contentious at trial that the two motorcycles had gone at least part of
the way around the bend in the road at the point
at which they had capsized and
were sliding toward the
is an aerial
view of the stretch of road on the approach to the bend. Photograph 4 marked
with the red arrows shows the paths of
the motorcycles heading south to the
points of impact with the barrier marked X (from the right to the left of the
photograph).
reconstruction by Professor Anderson of the specific points of impact of
each motorcycle with the guardrail. Mr Nurse's Honda
impacted with the
barrier at F1, and Mr Donaldson's Yamaha impacted with the barrier at
Photograph 4
Photograph 5
is possible to narrow down the 10-m stretch of road where the two motorcycles
collided, and therefore where the alleged acts of
negligent driving occurred, in
the following way. Firstly, using the uncontested evidence regarding the points
of impact of the
motorcycles with the barrier as depicted by the 'X' on
Photograph 4 and the point of impact of Mr Nurse's Honda at F1 and
Mr Donaldson's
Yamaha at F2 on Photograph
using the scale on Photograph
as a measure of
40 m, the northern most point of the black line is approximately 30 m
from the points of impact with the barrier.
The southern most point of the
commencement of the black line is approximately 20 m from the points of
impact with the barrier at
therefore take from the combination of the two that the point of collision
between the two motorcycles occurred approximately
m - 30 m to the north-east of the points of impact with
the barrier.
being unduly prescriptive, that analysis then focuses the area of the alleged
acts of negligent driving occurring (logically)
immediately prior to the point
of collision, to a section of Alexander Drive approximately 20 m to roughly
away from the points of impact with the
undertaken that analysis, that constrains the geographical location or the
stretch of road on which each Party claims the
other rode negligently. For ease
of reference in these reasons I will refer to this as '
the approach to the
THE PLEADINGS
this trial there were two trials running alongside each other.
Mr Donaldson's claim against Mr Nurse (CIV 385 of 2022) and
Nurse's claim against Mr Donaldson (CIV 1904 of
3.1 Mr Donaldson's pleaded position CIV 385 of 2022
Mr Donaldson's
pleaded position is that as he navigated the right bend adjacent to the
Thongsbridge Street intersection (the
Mr Nurse failed to negotiate the bend and overtook, and then passed in
front of, Mr Donaldson's motorcycle from Mr Donaldson's right
Mr Donaldson
pleads further that as Mr Nurse's motorcycle passed in front of his
motorcycle, the left-side of the rear tyre of Mr
Nurse's motorcycle
impacted with the front of Mr Donaldson's motorcycle causing
Mr Donaldson to lose control of his
motorcycle.
Mr Donaldson
claims that Mr Nurse breached the duty of care he owed to Mr Donaldson
as a fellow road user in failing to take reasonable
precautions to prevent harm
to Mr Donaldson. Specifically, that
(i) overtook
Mr Donaldson's motorcycle when it was unsafe to do so;
(ii) travelled across Mr Donaldson's line of travel;
(iii) overtook too closely to Mr Donaldson's motorcycle which impacted
upon Mr Donaldson's ability to control his motorcycle;
(iv) changed lanes when it was unsafe to do so;
(v) drove while intoxicated as that term is defined within
Civil Liability Act 2002
(WA) (CLA);
(vi) drove while under the influence of heroin and/or other illicit
(vii) drove at a speed that was excessive in the circumstances;
(viii) failed to keep any, or any proper, lookout;
(ix) failed to pay due care and attention while riding his motorcycle and to
take heed of the bend in the road;
(x) failed to brake, swerve, steer, manoeuvre and/or otherwise ride his
motorcycle in a manner to avoid the accident; and
(xi) failed to adequately control his motorcycle so as to avoid the
a result of the accident, Mr Donaldson sustained serious
Mr Donaldson
claims that the accident, and his injuries, were caused by Mr Nurse's
negligence.
is not necessary to set out the remainder of Mr Donaldson's pleadings as
they replicate the legislative provisions in
3.2 Mr Nurse's pleaded position
3.2.1 Mr Nurse's defence to CIV 385 of 2022
admits that he owed a duty of care as the rider of a motor vehicle to take
reasonable care for persons in the position of
Mr Donaldson, namely other
road users, by reason that it was reasonably foreseeable that persons in the
position of Mr Donaldson
might suffer harm if Mr Nurse failed to take
denies riding in a manner that was
and denies that the accident and the injuries sustained by
Mr Donaldson were caused by his (Mr Nurse's)
negligence.
Specifically,
Mr Nurse does not admit:
(a) that he failed to negotiate the
(b) that he overtook and passed Mr Donaldson's motorcycle from
Mr Donaldson's right side, nor
(c) that as his motorcycle passed in front of Mr Donaldson's motorcycle,
the left side of his (Mr Nurse's) motorcycle impacted with
the front of
Mr Donaldson's motorcycle causing Mr Donaldson to lose control of his
motorcycle.
3.2.2 Mr Nurse's claim against Mr Donaldson CIV 1904 of 2022
pleads in both his Defence to Mr Donaldson's action against
claim against
Mr Donaldson,
that it was Mr Donaldson who was negligent.
asserts that it was Mr Donaldson who was travelling behind Mr Nurse
and who then drove his front wheel into Mr Nurse's rear
Specifically,
Mr Nurse pleads that Mr Donaldson was negligent in that
Mr Donaldson:
to adequately or at all keep any or any proper
(b) failed to ride with any or any proper control in that he permitted his
front wheel to impact the rear wheel of Mr Nurse's
motorcycle;
(c) rode at a speed that was excessive in all the
circumstances;
(d) failed to adequately or at all brake in time to avoid the
(e) failed to adequately or at all steer or control his motorcycle so as to
denying that he rode his motorcycle in a manner that can be said to be
negligent, Mr Nurse also denies that the injuries sustained
Mr Donaldson were caused by or materially contributed to by Mr Nurse's
negligence.
asserts that the accident and any resultant injuries were wholly caused by
Mr Donaldson's own negligence in any of the five
alternative, Mr Nurse asserts that Mr Donaldson's injuries were
contributed to by his own (Mr Donaldson's)
negligence.
to the commencement of the trial Mr Nurse applied to amend his Statement of
Claim to include as particulars of negligence that
Mr Donaldson drove
whilst under the influence of illicit drugs and whilst intoxicated. That
application was ultimately withdrawn.
I detail this in [12.2] and my approach
to the issue of illicit drugs in [14.3].
MR DONALDSON'S EVIDENCE
4.1 Evidence-in-chief
Mr Donaldson
gave evidence that he had been riding motorcycles since he was about 3 years of
age. He grew up around motorcycles
and road dirt bikes in the bush on the
tracks and all throughout his younger
ridden all sorts of bikes including drag bikes and road
4.1.1 Meeting Mr Nurse
met Michael Nurse around August of 2020 'through a friend' and the two of them
met up at the Dianella Plaza car park at just after
12 September
the Dianella Plaza car park on his motorcycle, a Yamaha 6-speed,
model R6 2005 motorcycle that he had owned for 10 years
Mr Donaldson
initially told the court that he was in the Dianella area that evening because
he was 'just sleeping in that area that
night' and that he was 'at a chick's
place - at a friend's'.
his evidence-in-chief he gave no (plausible) account as to why he met up with
Mr Nurse at the Dianella Plaza car park, nor what
occurred during the
course of that meeting.
Mr Donaldson
said that when he left Mr Nurse in the car park before driving away,
he saw Mr Nurse on the floor of the car park, next
to the wall on
Mr Donaldson
said that he took a photograph of Mr Nurse lying on the ground at the
Dianella Plaza car
Mr Donaldson said that he took the photograph of Mr Nurse on his
mobile telephone and that photograph was then saved as a screenshot
name 'Troy Johnny's mate mobile + XXX XXXX
in his evidence he explained that the reason he took a photograph of
Mr Nurse on the ground was to send to his girlfriend.
She was 'hammering
him' with messages asking where he was, in circumstances where
Mr Donaldson was 'playing away from home' with
another girl at the
used the photograph as an excuse, telling his girlfriend that he was 'trying to
and using the photograph to explain 'this is what I am dealing with' to get her
off his back.
Mr Donaldson took the photograph of Mr Nurse on the ground
Mr Donaldson gave evidence that he observed Mr Nurse to be 'like
incoherent'.
Mr Donaldson
said that his plans after meeting Mr Nurse at the Dianella Plaza
car park was to head to Bunbury via Armadale. He was
Armadale to drop off some aftermarket motorcycle foot pegs for a mate at his
girlfriend's place to be picked up and to say
goodbye to his girlfriend for the
weekend before heading to spend the weekend with his 16-year-old daughter in
4.1.2 The lead up to the collision and the collision
Mr Donaldson
gave evidence that from the Dianella Plaza car park he rode his motorcycle
onto Alexander Drive heading southbound to
go straight onto the
said the conditions were quiet and the weather was clear but dark. In terms of
the lighting at the time as he rode down Alexander
Drive Mr Donaldson said
the lighting was 'fine', that it was a 'well lit up road' and that his
motorcycle had a working
said that the headlight always turns on when the motorcycle is on and that it
automatically.
he was driving southbound along Alexander Drive Mr Donaldson's evidence was
that he was in the left-hand lane on the far left-hand
side (of the dual
carriageway).
said there was not much traffic at that
Mr Donaldson
said that his motorcycle is quite loud and he does not know if he had one or two
headphones in at the time, like plug-ins,
but 'out of the blue' he heard a loud
noise coming from his right-hand
I kind of was blinded by light which was also in front of me, the black and
white signs were like, lit right up, the arrow.
Mr Donaldson
said that the reference to the black and white sign was a reference to him
approaching a right-hand bend, 'kind of a
long right-hand bend that has black
and white arrows like caution
is not controversial that Mr Donaldson was referring to the arrow sign
immediately to the north of the Thongsbridge Street intersection.
Mr Donaldson
said that as he heard the loud noise, 'really quickly, over like a second or two
at the most', the noise then stopped
to quieten down. Mr Donaldson said
that he was 'just about ready to get into the corner, to commit into the corner
maybe 20 - 30
After I heard the noise over my righthand side it was all lit up and then
I seen the bike come past my righthand side straight -
sort of in front of
my line, and we kind of - I was going this way, we were kind of going the same
way from 20, 30 metres back.
I don't know what happened exactly in this gap
between the noise and then the last thing was the bike was in front of me. I
know if I hit the skids or not but I couldn't go any other way but
squeezed in and we collided.
Mr Donaldson
explained that by his reference to being 'squeezed in' and not being able to go
any other way meant that he was 'on
the left coming around' and he was 'kind of
committed to the corner. There's nowhere else to go' and that 'I had
committed to taking
the corner ... I was getting ready for it
his left was a barrier, a metal barrier like a guardrail. At the time
that he saw the motorcycle in front of him he did not know
at the time who was
riding the motorcycle. He then said that as the motorcycle came past the last
thing he saw
it seemed like Michael was - like had his legs down like as if he was like
bracing -bracing for impact so - yeah, that's the last
I sort of seen before I -
before impact.
Mr Donaldson
said that the front right-hand tyre of his motorcycle hit the left-hand side of
the back wheel of Mr Nurse's
motorcycle.
explaining why he collided with Mr Nurse's back wheel Mr Donaldson
explained that he just had nowhere to go. He
He - he's just come straight past me and cut me off. So I had nowhere to go and
no time to sort of change my direction.
the time of the collision Mr Donaldson was (still) travelling in the
left-hand lane.
At the time that Mr Nurse's motorcycle intersected with Mr Donaldson's
motorcycle, Mr Nurse's motorcycle was also in the left
Mr Donaldson
marked in green on a street view of the dual carriageway along Alexander Drive
heading south towards the Thongsbridge
Street intersection his line of travel on
the approach to the bend. He marked in red Mr Nurse's line of travel on
the approach to
the bend. The point at which the green and red lines intersect
was where, on Mr Donaldson's evidence, the two motorcycles
Exhibit 2 Annexure 6
Mr Donaldson
gave evidence that as the motorcycles collided, he blacked out and the next
thing he remembers was rolling to his finish.
He said it felt like someone had
an oxyacetylene torch on his legs, he thinks from the damage and the
first person who attended the scene he recalls was an off-duty lifeguard and he
does not remember anything after the heavy drugs
he was given to get him off the
floor. His next memory is waking up in a hospital room post-surgery and his
body was not the
He no longer had the ability to use his legs and
Yeah I was a paraplegic yeah.
4.1.3 Mr Donaldson's interactions with Mr Nurse after the accident
Mr Donaldson
gave evidence that he saw Mr Nurse twice after the accident. The first
interaction was about a week or week and a half
after the accident and
Mr Donaldson saw Mr Nurse out the front of Royal Perth
Mr Donaldson
said he had a conversation with Mr Nurse and he felt that Mr Nurse was
there to apologise to him and to support him.
He had some toiletries for
Mr Donaldson.
that first interaction, Mr Donaldson said that Mr Nurse did not know
what had happened exactly, but he indicated that he was going
Mr Donaldson with any lawyers or anything he needed through all of this
Mr Donaldson
saw Mr Nurse on a second occasion approximately three days after the first
occasion. Mr Donaldson was still in hospital
then. There was no evidence
as to what was discussed on that second occasion.
4.2 Cross-examination
4.2.1 Meeting Mr Nurse
Mr Donaldson
accepted in cross-examination that he got out of bed and pretty much drove
straight to Dianella Plaza car park to 'see
a friend' who he named as
Mr Nurse. He agreed it was a prearranged meeting. Mr Nurse had rung
him and said: 'let's catch up'.
Mr Donaldson
initially denied that in his examination-in-chief he had not been entirely
transparent (my words) about the circumstances
of his meeting with
Mr Donaldson
conceded in cross-examination that his meeting with Mr Nurse was a
prearranged meeting, but denied that the purpose
of the meeting was to then go
and see a third person.
pressed for the details of why he met Mr Nurse at the Dianella Plaza
car park Mr Donaldson indicated that he might be incriminating
was plain that the purposes of the meeting between Mr Donaldson and
Mr Nurse was for illicit reasons. It was further apparent
(to me) that
Mr Donaldson had not given a full, nor honest, account of the circumstances
of his meeting with Mr Nurse in his evidence-in-chief.
It was plain that
he was still skirting around the circumstances of the meeting with Mr Nurse
at the commencement of his cross-examination.
considered that the reasons for the meeting, what occurred at the Dianella Plaza
car park and what occurred immediately after the
meeting were relevant in a
number of respects, including to my findings of fact, specifically to some of
the pleaded
particulars
of Mr Donaldson's claim against Mr Nurse and to my overall assessment
of the credibility of both Parties.
I therefore
considered that the interests of justice required that Mr Donaldson give a
full and honest account of those events and
I granted him immunity from
prosecution under
Evidence Act 1906
Mr Donaldson
then gave evidence about the nature of his meeting with Mr Nurse at the
Dianella Plaza car park. Mr Donaldson said
that 'there were parts
take to be a reference to him being economical with the truth in his
evidence-in-chief as to how and under what circumstances
he met up with
Mr Nurse in the early hours of 12 September 2020.
Mr Donaldson
said that the night before Mr Nurse was withdrawing and was calling
Mr Donaldson asking for 'something' without cash
(on credit).
Mr Donaldson said that Mr Nurse had called him numerous times over the
previous 12 hours. Mr Donaldson had saved Mr
Nurse as a contact
in his phone under 'Troy, Johnny's
Mr Donaldson
arranged to meet Mr Nurse at around
was close enough to the time that Mr Donaldson was leaving to go to Bunbury
that morning. Mr Donaldson said that he got out
of bed and rode to meet
Mr Nurse at the
Mr Donaldson
said he saw Mr Nurse and then he had ridden around the corner before
returning. That is when he saw Mr Nurse lying
on the ground and took a
photograph of
Mr Donaldson returned Mr Nurse was waiting for him. Mr Donaldson
said that Mr Nurse 'got his stuff' and 'yeah he was sick'
and that 'he's
had his gear
Mr Donaldson
agreed that he had sold Mr Nurse some
Mr Donaldson
said that he just had heroin on him which he was
not disagree that police found heroin in his
Mr Donaldson
did not specify which type of illicit drugs he supplied to Mr Nurse,
whether heroin, methylamphetamine or some other
Mr Donaldson
said he tried to 'kick him in the guts', but it was probably over 5 minutes
until he was 'like freshened up and off
kicking him in the guts, Mr Donaldson said that was just a figure of speech
- it was like getting him to wake up and he then
woke up and came
4.2.2 Leaving the car park and the lead up to the collision
Mr Donaldson
said that he was on his motorcycle and Mr Nurse was doing his jacket up and
jumping on his motorcycle as Mr Donaldson
Mr Donaldson
denied that there was any agreement between the two men to travel together to
West Perth to an address that was known
only to Mr Nurse (and not to
Mr Donaldson) in order to buy drugs.
Mr Donaldson
said that there was no such arrangement. Mr Donaldson said that he had his
'own sources', which I take to be a reference
to his ability to source illicit
drugs to sell or supply into the
Mr Donaldson
I was the dealer. He was the addict.
Mr Donaldson
denied that he and Mr Nurse then rode together from the Dianella Plaza car
park to where the collision
Mr Donaldson
denied travelling together with Mr Nurse and denied that Mr Donaldson
had been travelling on the right-hand side of
Mr Donaldson
said he had no recollection of stopping at any traffic lights at any
intersection before the
4.2.3 The collision
terms of the mechanics of the collision, Mr Donaldson denied that he
collided with Mr Nurse's back wheel to the right-hand side.
No sir. Not my recollection.
asked whether that could have happened, he replied
Mr Donaldson
was shown the reconstructed crash site at
Photograph 5
accepting as a premise that F1 indicates where Mr Nurse's motorcycle
impacted with the barrier. Mr Donaldson denied in cross-examination
clipped Mr Nurse's motorcycle on the right-hand side
for Mr Nurse to then hit the barrier at
Mr Donaldson
denied that if he hit the barrier at F2 on
Photograph 5
must have been
hit by Mr Donaldson from his left-hand
side. He said
Mr Donaldson denied that he had to have hit him with his left-hand side
onto Mr Nurse's right-hand
4.2.4 Other matters going to credit
Mr Donaldson
agreed that at the time he did not have a valid licence to ride his motorcycle.
He admitted that he was subsequently
charged and pleaded guilty to riding with a
disqualified motor driver's licence, in respect of which he was fined $1,000 and
disqualified
for a further
Mr Donaldson's
blood alcohol reading after the crash was nil. However, he tested positive to
having methylamphetamine in his blood
(0.24 mg/L) and positive to
amphetamine
(0.06 mg/L).
Mr Donaldson was subsequently charged with driving with a prescribed
illicit drug in his blood and he pleaded guilty to that
4.2.5 Where there was no evidence
Mr Donaldson
was not cross-examined (nor examined-in-chief) about his speed on the approach
to the bend. That was consistent with
the way in which the trial was conducted
on the issue of speed. I deal with this in [10.2].
was there any evidence as to the effect, if any, of the illicit drugs in
Mr Donaldson's blood on his manner of driving.
I deal with this in [12.2]
and [14.3].
MR NURSE'S EVIDENCE
5.1 Evidence-in-chief
gave evidence that he lived in Esperance for several years and owned a
motorcycle that he rode pretty much every weekend,
before moving to Perth and
getting into road
admitted that he had struggled with addiction, 'several' times, and that as of
12 September 2020 he did not have a valid
5.1.1 Meeting Mr Donaldson
the evening of 12 September 2020, Mr Nurse said that he had been
'working on his bike' for quite a few hours into the morning
and leading up to
the accident. He said he had been in contact with Mr Donaldson throughout
that time to arrange to meet up. He
I wanted to test the bike out. I'd been working on it. He knew a bit more
at Dianella Plaza which we
did and then from there we were going to go to a friend of mine's place in
Havelock Street in West Perth
to see what he was up to.
respect to Mr Donaldson's evidence that at Dianella Plaza car park he had
given Mr Nurse some drugs Mr Nurse's response was
non-responsive:
That's what he alleged yeah.
was then asked whether that was correct and he
no it wasn't, not at all.
denied that the man lying on the concrete ground in the photograph taken by
Mr Donaldson was him. He said that he had 'no
idea who that is' but
that 'it's definitely not
5.1.2 The lead up to the collision
said that he and Mr Donaldson left Dianella Plaza car park just after
4.00 am. Mr Nurse said that the agreement was for
Mr Donaldson
to follow him because Mr Donaldson did not know the address of
Mr Nurse's friend in Havelock
said that he and Mr Donaldson pulled up at the traffic lights of either
Bradbury or Bradford Street. Mr Nurse said that
his last visual
observation of Mr Donaldson was at the lights and that Mr Donaldson
was in the right-hand
We pulled up. I was in the left lane. Shaun was in the right-hand lane.
I accelerated to approximately 60 km per hour. Braked,
started braking to hit the corner and that's all I remember. I got hit from
behind, forced into the railing and yeah.
5.2 Cross-examination
5.2.1 Matters going to credit
agreed that the registration plates on his motorcycle were false, but maintained
that it was his
motorcycle.
was put to him that that was not his motorcycle at the time. In the face of the
VIN number for the Honda being registered to
another person, Mr Nurse
maintained that he was the owner of the motorcycle but that he had not yet
transferred it into his
Mr Nurse said that he had had the bike for 3 - 4 months and
he agreed it was a very powerful
motorcycle.
admitted that he has a criminal history including of armed robbery and multiple
offences of
Mr Nurse's criminal history was tendered into
denied that the screenshot of the person on the
(by Mr Donaldson) under 'Troy, Johnny's mate' with the phone number XXX
XXXX 125 was him. Mr Nurse agreed that he goes under
an alias 'Troy'. He
said 'yes, Troy Craven, that's the alias on Facebook
Mr Nurse ultimately agreed that his phone number at the time was XXX XXXX
5.2.2 Illicit drugs
was cross-examined that he had taken drugs at the Dianella Plaza car park
before getting on his motorcycle. The following
exchange took
So you had taken drugs at the Dianella Plaza car park before getting on your
motorbike, didn't you?---What was the alleged drug?
Either amphetamine or heroin?---No, I didn't.
And can I suggest to you that this answer is untruthful?---Couldn't have been
import of his evidence was to deny having taken any illicit drugs at the
Dianella Plaza car park.
was put to Mr Nurse that he was under the influence of, or impaired
by, drugs at the time he was riding immediately prior to the
No I wasn't. I had drugs in my system. I'd probably used 72 hours
maintained that he had not taken illicit drugs 24 hours prior to the
Mr Nurse denied taking heroin before the accident and he denied taking an
illicit substance before the
agreed that after the accident he returned a positive blood test to
methylamphetamine (0.1 mg/L) and amphetamine
(0.02 mg/L).
denied that he was feeling the effects of the amphetamine and methylamphetamine
found in his system at the time of the crash
No I wasn't. I'll say it again. I used 72 hours prior to the accident but
it was not 24.
denied that he was impaired by those drugs and that any such impairment from the
drugs impacted the way in which he rode
his motorcycle. He said
there were two propositions in this question, ultimately Mr Nurse denied
both propositions. Later in cross-examination he
denied riding whilst
impaired by
5.2.3 What Mr Nurse told medical staff about illicit drugs - the hospital
the accident, Mr Nurse was admitted to hospital. Numerous medical records were
tendered into evidence at trial.
agreed that he told hospital staff that he used intravenous heroin
he wanted to get some methadone, he wanted stronger pain medication because he
was in excruciating pain and the medication
he was given was not working.
Royal Perth Hospital Trauma Tertiary Survey medical
under the heading 'Mechanism of injury. Precipitating factors the notation
42-year-old male. High speed MBC 150 km per
hour into guard rail
while under influence of heroin'. The entry is dated 14 September
evidence was that he thinks he told hospital staff that he consumed heroin
before the accident and that he had done so
in order to get stronger pain
medication.
agreed that he therefore exaggerated his
thereby lying to hospital staff to get more
medication.
Royal Perth Hospital inpatient case notes document an entry dated '14.9.20 at
14.50' that says '46 y o man past MBA IVDU heroin
- intoxicated at time of
accident. SIB APS - commence
methadone'.
was cross-examined that he told hospital staff on 14 September at around
2.50 pm that he was intoxicated at the time of
the accident. He said:
'Well I might have said that but I wasn't'. He then said 'I don't
was then suggested that Mr Nurse was telling hospital staff the truth
because they were treating him. He replied: 'I don't
was cross-examined about a note documented by (on its face) clinical
psychologist Adile Drew dated 15 September 2020 at
Thank you for your referral. Reason for referral - 42 yr old male high speed
MVA. Heroin onboard and PT was intoxicated.
could not recall if three days after the accident he told staff that he had
taken heroin 'on board' at the time of the accident.
He replied:
I don't recall, I don't know.
was cross-examined about an entry in the Royal Perth Hospital Inpatient Case
15 September 2020 at 2.30 pm with the stamp 'Social work'. It
Michael was admitted to RPH on the 12/9/20 following a motorbike accident
whereby Michael was driving his friend was on a separate
bike they were both
travelling at 150 kmph they veered into the safety barrier both were under
the influence of heroin.
was put to Mr Nurse that on 15 September 2020 he told hospital staff
that he was intoxicated at the time of the accident. Mr
initially non-responsive in his evidence. He
the blood test says differently doesn't it?
the question was asked again, his response was that he did not recall telling
hospital staff that he was intoxicated at the
time of the
was not cross-examined about the entry in those notes to
the following page, still part of the same hospital note by the social worker,
on 15 September 2020 in the same handwriting as
the previous page, there is
a reference to:
AOD: Michael reports he is addicted to heroin and has been for 20 plus
said that he was struggling with heroin addiction most of his adult
was cross-examined about an entry in the Royal Perth Hospital discharge summary
dated 16 September
records under 'Clinical Synopsis' the following:
Clinical synopsis information presenting history: 42-year-old male, MBA v MBA @
150 km/hr - went into guardrail, helmet worn had
taken heroin and
documented in medical notes.
agreed that he had told hospital staff that he went into a guardrail, and he
told them that he was wearing a helmet. It
was suggested to Mr Nurse in
cross-examination that he told hospital staff that he'd taken heroin.
He said 'I don't recall saying
there was no cross-examination of Mr Nurse about the notations relevant to
5.2.4 Mr Nurse's memory of the accident
was cross-examined extensively about his memory of the accident, what he had,
and had not, told hospital staff and subsequent
medical practitioners about the
accident, and when his memory 'returned'. Whilst the cross-examination on this
aspect of Mr Nurse's
evidence is long, it is necessary to set it out in
some detail to explain my findings of fact.
St John Ambulance Patient Care record for
contains a notation: 'Pt unable to recall events, unable to state speed'.
Mr Nurse accepted in cross-examination that he was unable
to recall events
at that point in time, that is, when he spoke to St John Ambulance officers at
accepted that that was the case and said that he was 'severely concussed at the
was suggested to Mr Nurse in cross-examination that he did not tell
hospital staff or the St John Ambulance staff that he had
been 'rear-ended' or
struck by Mr Donaldson from behind. He
At that point I was - I had no recollection of the
actual incident.
was cross-examined about entries on Royal Perth Hospital inpatient notes for
13 September 2020 with the stamp 'OT' and the
reference 'GCS 13 at scene,
amnesic to events. ? heroin on board.
relation to the entry 'Amnesic to events', Mr Nurse's evidence was that he
does not recall whether that is what he told staff
at Royal Perth Hospital
the day after the
cross-examination Mr Nurse agreed that it was pretty tough remembering
specific events from four years ago.
was suggested to Mr Nurse in cross-examination that in giving his evidence
in court he was not able to recall the events of the
accident. His evidence was
not entirely clear at this point. He initially replied: 'no. Not after the
I can't recall the impact no. But events leading up to the accident I can and
after I woke up in hospital I can yeah. It took a
while for my memory to come
was cross-examined at some length about when his memory returned. It was
suggested to him in cross-examination that no
prior account was given by him of
the events of the accident for some considerable time after the accident, a
matter of many
said that he eventually gave (the Insurance Commission) his version of events of
the accident, 'at the right time I
was suggested to Mr Nurse that the 'right time' to complete or to provide
his version of events was when it was fresh in his memory
shortly after it
happened. He then said
I suffered a severe [indistinct] and mental issues as well with the accident
because of the way Shaun ended up as well. I was struggling
emotionally. So I was probably - I probably didn't want to deal with it at the
time ... emotionally I wasn't able to'.
to when Mr Nurse's memory returned, he gave evidence that he went to prison
in January 2021 and was released in January 2022.
He agreed that he
instructed Simon Walters solicitors when he was in
was suggested to Mr Nurse in cross-examination that when he instructed
Simon Walters to represent him in this case, he could not
recall the events
relating to the accident on 12 September 2020.
Well everything was clearing up. I was ready to deal with it and spoke to Simon
to help me with.
was suggested to Mr Nurse in cross-examination that before he instructed
Simon Walters his memory had not recovered. His response
It was slow coming back. I was in prison. I was clean. I was in a bit of an
emotional state to deal with the stuff that happened
from the accident and my
life in general.
evidence about whether he had provided a response to the Insurance Commission as
at 22 June 2021 was non-responsive and
evasive. He said any response that
he gave was always through Simon (Walters) but he never dealt with them
directly. He agreed
that he had not responded to the Insurance Commission
directly as at 22 June 2021 but said that he was 'not sure' if Simon
was taken to an email from Matthew Brown at the Insurance Commission to
ella@simonwalters.com.au dated 13 October 2021 which
I advise that in the absence of your client's version of events we have not been
able to progress our investigations in relation
to liability.
was suggested to Mr Nurse that as at 13 October 2021 he had not
responded to the Insurance Commission's request for information.
said that he was trying to get released from jail between then and January. He
I knew I had three years to deal with it from the accident so I was aware of the
- the statute of limitations so I was waiting until
I got out, I think, to do
that, I think, but I can't really remember.
Mr Nurse's evidence appeared to be that he was 'unsure' as to whether he
had responded to the Insurance Commission's request
for information as at
was put to Mr Nurse in cross-examination that as at 13 October 2021 he
had no recollection whatsoever as to the events that occurred
12 September 2020. His response
It was slowly coming back, yeah.
5.2.5 What Mr Nurse told Dr Goodheart on 14 December 2021
agreed that he spoke to Dr Ross Goodheart, a Consultant Neurologist, via video
link from prison on 14 December 2021. Dr
Goodheart had been
instructed by Mr Nurse's solicitor Simon Walters by letter
agreed in cross-examination that Dr Goodheart asked Mr Nurse questions
and Mr Nurse provided Dr Goodheart with
Dr Goodheart
wrote to Simon Walters by letter dated 14 December 2021. That letter
I was told that he was the rider of a motorbike and was travelling at some
speed. He may have been involved in a collision with
another motorbike. He has
been told that he was thrown from his motorbike onto the road surface. There
was a period of loss of
consciousness. Mr Nurse has no particular
recollection of events immediately before or after the
agreed in cross-examination that he told Dr Goodheart that he 'may have
been involved in a collision with another
motorcycle'.
response to whether he had told Dr Goodheart that he had been told that he
was thrown from his motorcycle onto the road surface,
Mr Nurse answered 'I
had been told that I had been
agreed that he told Dr Goodheart that there was a period of loss of
consciousness and that he told Dr Goodheart that he
had no particular
recollection of events immediately before or after the
Mr Nurse was asked in cross-examination that he had told Dr Goodheart
that because it was true, Mr Nurse's evidence again was
evasive. He
I can put it in a timeframe if you want.
then conceded that he did tell Dr Goodheart that he had no recollection of
the events surrounding the
was then suggested to Mr Nurse that he told Dr Goodheart that because
that was the truth, namely that Mr Nurse had no recollection
of the events
leading up to the accident. He
It is, yes. The collision yes definitely. Yes. The immediate point of impact
answer was cut short but was followed by this
can't remember the events immediately before either?
couple of seconds before, a couple of seconds after. I can't no.
agreed with the proposition that the reason why he was giving evidence in the
case is to say that he remembers being
rear-ended.
was further suggested to Mr Nurse that the reason why he was giving
evidence to say that he remembered being rear-ended was in
order to further his
own compensation claim, and that it was not true. His response
I just want the truth. No it's not true what you're saying.
following exchange then
Q: ...just to be clear Mr Nurse you accept that Dr Goodheart asked you
a question about what happened in the accident?
Q: And you told him you have no particular recollection of events immediately
before or after the accident?
A: Immediately being probably several seconds before and seconds after the time
was challenged in cross-examination that he did not tell Dr Goodheart
anything else relating to the accident. Mr Nurse
Well he didn't ask.
went on to say that he was there (to see Dr Goodheart) about his
neurological problems, sleeping and nightmares and all
was suggested to Mr Nurse in evidence that he could not remember the events
of the accident when he saw Dr Goodheart. Mr Nurse
the time of the collision no but the events leading up to it yes and then
shortly after. But around the time of the actual impact
or the collision -
because Shaun was behind me so I didn't see him hit me from behind and then you
guys got your engineers report
that explained it a bit more for me as well. So
as information came to light I began to piece things together.
then agreed with the proposition that he was saying that he had reconstructed
his memory over
was put to Mr Nurse in cross-examination that he did not have a genuine
recollection of the accident as at 14 December 2021 when
he spoke to
Dr Goodheart. Mr Nurse responded by
Well he wasn't asking about the events leading up to it, about fixing my
motorbike, this and that. It was just - he was worried
impact that I suffered ... the concussion that I suffered at
was no cross-examination about any reference to speed in the letter from
Dr Goodheart.
5.2.6 What Mr Nurse told Dr De Felice on 9 May 2022
gave evidence that he attended on Dr De Felice, a psychiatrist
approximately 5 or 6 months after he saw
Dr Goodheart.
This was a bit over a year after he had instructed Simon Walters to
represent him in the
agreed that he was asked questions by Dr De Felice and he provided
Dr De Felice
wrote to Simon Walters dated 9 May
that Dr De Felice assessed Mr Nurse 'today' namely on 9 May
2022. The letter from Dr Felice to Simon Walters
Mr Nurse described his motorbike accident (MBA) of 12 September 2020.
He said he was the helmeted rider of his own motorbike coming
to a righthand
bend when he braked to go round the corner. He said that was his last memory
and his next memory was being on his
back and he thought the ambulance was
already there but he wasn't sure saying he was in and out of consciousness.
Mr Nurse said the only witness was his friend who was riding his own
motorcycle and he reported that Michael was going too fast,
his friend claiming
to have gone on his outside to protect him but came off himself. Mr Nurse
said he had what he thought were patchy
glimpses but concluded that this
friend's story was physically impossible, his friend blaming him since he had
become paraplegic
from the accident.
accepted that in May 2022 he told Dr De Felice that his last memory
was applying the brakes as he was going around the corner.
He agreed that that
was his last
was put to Mr Nurse that he had no memory of the collision at that point in
Of the impact no because I was hit from behind.
agreed ultimately in cross-examination that he had no real recollection of the
events leading to the motorcycle accident.
Correct, because I was hit from behind. Yes. And that was Shaun was trying to
tell me what had happened.
was put to Mr Nurse in cross-examination that he told
Dr De Felice that he was trying to remember what happened.
At impact yes. I was trying to work out the whole - because his story didn't
add up. His - the way his - his version of events
didn't sit right with me ...
so that was something I was grappling with.
accepted that he told Dr De Felice that he was trying to remember what
happened in the accident. He denied, however, that
that was because he had no
clear memory of the accident. He
no, because I was hit from behind.
was suggested to Mr Nurse in cross-examination that he did not tell
Dr De Felice that he was hit from
Well, it was only your engineer's report. That's what told me
following exchange then
Q: So is that the first time you formed the belief you were hit from behind when
you received Professor Anderson's report?
A: No. Listening to Shaun's story, that didn't add up. Looking at the
investigations that Simon - Simon started doing investigations,
drawing pictures
... putting together reports himself and we started piecing it together based on
the police report, marks on the
road, what was possible what
was challenged again in cross-examination that the starting point was that he
had no recollection of the accident.
He responded:
Of the impact.
was put to Mr Nurse that he had tried to piece together the circumstances
of the accident since it occurred. He
Yeah I wanted to find out exactly what happened.
said further that Mr Donaldson's version of events just physically does not
denied that he had only started piecing together what had happened as of
10 May 2022 Mr Nurse agreed that he commenced proceedings against
Mr Donaldson. He said that
In reaction to him suing me, yeah. You've got to defend
was suggested to Mr Nurse in cross-examination that he instructed his
solicitors to sue Mr Donaldson despite at that point in
time not knowing
what happened in the accident. He
Well I know I had been struck at speed from behind and the road rules are pretty
clear on that and I wasn't gonna file anything but
denied that when he saw Mr Donaldson after the accident in hospital that he
accepted at that point in time that he had caused
the accident. He said: 'No I
didn't. I didn't say
was again put to him that he actually had no recollection of the events leading
up to the accident. He
Leading up to it yes, but the point of impact no.
was put to him that he's bringing his claim on the basis of an allegation which
is false. He
it's my response to Shaun filing a claim against me.
Q: So is your evidence that because Mr Donaldson commenced proceeding
against you, you saw it fit to commence proceedings against
A: I'm defending myself. I've got a right to defend
5.2.7 The lead up to the collision
maintained that he and Mr Donaldson were going to a house in West Perth.
He said Mr Donaldson was following him and that
denied that Mr Donaldson was in front of Mr Nurse in the left-hand
denied that he overtook Mr Donaldson on his right as they approached the
corner or the right-hand bend near Thongsbridge
denied cutting off Mr Donaldson's path as he approached the corner and
denied that that was because he was going at excessive
speed. He said: 'No I
agreed he slowed down because he anticipated the
denied that he intersected the path of Mr Donaldson's motorcycle in the
left-hand lane. He maintained that he was in the
left-hand lane the 'whole
he did not know what happened behind
All I know is I got impacted from behind, pushed into the
was suggested to Mr Nurse that he had cut Mr Donaldson off near the
corner and that had caused the collision between the two motorcycles.
Mr Nurse denied cutting Mr Donaldson off. He said that
Mr Donaldson's front wheel hit Mr Nurse's back wheel and he was in the
denied overtaking Mr Donaldson in front on an angle and he denied that the
accident was entirely his
5.2.8 Where there was no evidence
was not cross-examined in any detail about his speed. The only reference in
cross-examination to speed was the suggestion
that Mr Nurse had cut
Mr Donaldson off as he approached the corner and that was because he was
travelling at an 'excessive speed'.
This question contained two
propositions. Ultimately Mr Nurse answered that question as if it were
confined to the issue of him
travelling at an excessive speed by denying that he
was. He was not pressed on this further.
so far as the medical records referenced 'high speeds' or particular speeds
that were plainly very high, for example,
Mr Nurse was not cross-examined on those aspects of the medical records
that referenced speed.
re-examination Mr Nurse agreed that when he spoke to St John's
Ambulance at the scene he did not remember what speed he was
deal with the issue of Mr Nurse's speed in
MY ASSESSMENT OF THE WITNESSES
6.1 General
is necessary for me to assess the credibility and reliability of the evidence of
Mr Donaldson and Mr Nurse as witnesses and to
thereby determine the
weight to be given to the respective witness'
determining credibility, I am assessing the honesty of the witness. In
assessing credibility I have taken into account whether
the witness answered the
question openly and fully, explaining his evidence and the reasons for reaching
his conclusions, or whether
the witness demonstrated an unwillingness to fully
and frankly answer the questions asked of him.
determining reliability, I have assessed whether the witness gave an accurate
account of what he saw, heard or did. In this case
in determining the
reliability of Mr Donaldson's evidence and Mr Nurse's evidence, I have
considered whether the witness in fact
had a genuine recollection of the events
upon which they were giving evidence.
have considered whether the witness' testimony was consistent with what had been
said on a previous occasion and, if there were
any inconsistencies, whether
those inconsistencies were in respect of significant matters or matters of
little significance. I have
further considered whether there was any reasonable
explanation for those inconsistencies.
have taken into account whether the evidence of Mr Donaldson and
Mr Nurse was internally consistent, that is, whether it remained
throughout examination in chief, cross-examination and any re-examination. In
so far as there were inconsistencies within
the witness' evidence, I have
examined the significance of those inconsistencies and the reasons for those
inconsistencies.
approach the oral evidence given by both Mr Donaldson and Mr Nurse
with great care. Where possible, I assess the evidence of each
against any
external or objective evidence that I accept as honest, accurate and
there is no objective evidence against which to measure the honesty, accuracy
and reliability of the oral evidence given by
either man, I have carefully
assessed the manner in which each gave his evidence.
carefully observed the demeanour of each man, whether there was any hesitation
in answering questions, whether I formed the impression
that either man was
lying or seeking to embellish his answers and whether, if either was not sure
he attempted to guess.
also carefully assessed whether there was any contemporaneous evidence that I
accept as reliable and accurate, that sheds light
on whether the witness had a
genuine recollection of the events about which he gave evidence or whether the
witness sought at trial
to reconstruct events to suit his narrative.
am not required to accept all of a witness' evidence, neither am I required
to reject all of a witness' evidence. I am able to
accept part of a witness'
evidence and to reject other parts of that witness'
I formed the impression that a witness was untruthful about a particular part of
their evidence, I have carefully considered
whether that goes to a fact in issue
in this case, or whether it goes to my overall assessment of the witness'
evidence generally.
approach is that disbelief of any aspect of either Mr Donaldson's account
or Mr Nurse's account does not establish the contrary
or, in general terms,
that a witness giving a contrary account must be
in one thing does not mean false in
everything'.
is significant is not the mere fact of untruthfulness but the relevance to the
issues in dispute. A finding that a witness
has lied about a matter need not
lead to the rejection of all of the evidence of the witness, but it may affect
the degree of satisfaction
of the existence or otherwise of a fact in issue to
which the witness' evidence was
the circumstances of this case, if I am unable to make a finding one way or
another as to what actually happened, it is open to
decide the issue on the
basis that, in his action against Mr Nurse, Mr Donaldson, who bears
the burden of proof, has failed to discharge
it is open to me to decide the issue on the basis that, in his action
against Mr Donaldson, Mr Nurse, who bears the burden
of proof, has
failed to discharge his burden.
man's claim against the other will succeed unless the whole of the evidence
establishes a reasonable satisfaction on the
preponderance of probabilities such
as to sustain the relevant
the law requires proof of any fact, I must feel an actual persuasion of its
occurrence or existence before it can be
deciding the facts I bear in mind not just what the probabilities are on the
limited material which the court has, but also
whether that limited material is
an appropriate basis on which to reach a reasonable
a mere mechanical comparison of probabilities independent of a reasonable
satisfaction will not justify a finding of
6.2 Credibility findings Mr Donaldson
Mr Donaldson
was not before the court as a person of prior good character. He has an
extensive criminal
smorgasbord of offences including drug offences (possession of heroin,
methylamphetamine and cannabis), weapons offences, breaching
court orders
(Family Violence Restraining Orders, breaches of bail, breaches of
community based orders), offences of violence (aggravated
common assault), a
plethora of traffic offences and offences of dishonesty (burglary, steal motor
vehicle, fraud and stealing).
Mr Donaldson
has over the course of the past 25 years been sentenced to numerous terms
of immediate imprisonment as well as to suspended
periods of imprisonment.
the time that Mr Donaldson rode his motorcycle on 12 September 2020 he
did not have a valid driver's licence and he had a blood
reading positive to
methylamphetamine and amphetamine.
noted already, Mr Donaldson' evidence-in-chief did not begin candidly.
That was hardly surprising given that he had a few skeletons
in the cupboard. I
venture to say that that cupboard was rather full.
only was he no stranger to the criminal justice system, to put it in neutral
terms, he was at the time, as he ultimately admitted,
a drug user and
a drug dealer.
Mr Donaldson's
evidence-in-chief in respect of the circumstances of him meeting Mr Nurse
under cover of darkness at the Dianella
Plaza car park was neither candid
nor frank. Mr Donaldson glossed over how he came to meet Mr Nurse and
why. I did not consider
that his evidence-in-chief about the circumstances of
him meeting Mr Nurse at the Dianella Plaza car park was given
cross-examination when Mr Donaldson's account about the circumstances of
him meeting Mr Nurse was challenged, it was clear that
Mr Donaldson's
meeting with Mr Nurse had nothing to do with a fortuitous 4 am catch
up, nor (on Mr Nurse's evidence) anything to
do with Mr Donaldson
meeting was clearly about illicit drugs.
granted Mr Donaldson immunity from prosecution, he then went on to give
what I considered to be candid and frank evidence
meeting with Mr Nurse and that his relationship with Mr Nurse was one
of drug dealer (Donaldson) and drug
user (Nurse).
Mr Donaldson was, on his own admission, dealing illicit drugs and using
illicit drugs, as evidenced from his blood samples post-accident,
need for me to approach his evidence as a whole with caution and to scrutinise
it carefully.
have questioned carefully why Mr Donaldson's evidence-in-chief as to the
circumstances of him meeting Mr Nurse was not initially
forthcoming and
candid, and whether that lack of candour continued to other aspects of his
evidence and matters of significance.
also have regard to the fact that Mr Donaldson presented as a person with a
lengthy criminal history. Mr Donaldson was not cross-examined
prior convictions or how they impact (or ought to impact) my
assessment of the evidence he gave at trial. His criminal
history was tendered
into evidence but no submissions were made as to what I ought to make of
is fair to observe that the matters I have referred to individually and
collectively ought to, and do, raise red flags about whether
I am able to accept
any part of Mr Donaldson's evidence.
does not follow from the fact alone that a person has a criminal history or that
they were selling or using illicit drugs that
they cannot be a witness of the
truth about any aspect of their evidence.
does not follow from those facts alone that Mr Donaldson was an unreliable
witness about every aspect of his evidence. To reason
in either of those two
ways would be to engage in a process of reasoning based solely on moral
judgement and prejudice. It would
be very simple, and perhaps even intuitive,
but in my view, wrong, to reason in that way. This is not a trial about
Mr Donaldson's
moral compass.
have concluded in respect of Mr Donaldson that whilst I must approach and
scrutinise his evidence with great care, and weigh each
aspect carefully, that
this is not a 'job lot'. Whilst I reject parts of his evidence, it does not
follow that I must, nor that
I in fact, reject the entirety of his oral
evidence. This is a case where a more nuanced approach is required to
Mr Donaldson's
I believed next to nothing of Mr Donaldson's account of the circumstances
of him meeting with Mr Nurse prior being granted
immunity from prosecution,
Mr Donaldson's demeanour subsequently changed. I formed the impression
that he was more relaxed, he answered
the questions asked of him directly,
he did not seek to evade answering the questions put to him and, where he had no
memory of aspects
of the collision, he said so.
light of his (clear) reticence to give frank evidence about the meeting with
Mr Nurse in the car park, I approached the evidence
thereafter about the accident with some caution and also scepticism. However,
even examining his evidence in that light,
I did not form the
impression that in his evidence-in-chief when giving evidence about the lead-up
to the collision and the collision
itself, that Mr Donaldson was
hesitant or evasive. Neither did he seek to guess when he did not have a
genuine recollection of certain
impression of Mr Donaldson's reluctance to answer questions directly and in
a fulsome manner prior to being granted immunity from
prosecution was confined
to his meeting with Mr Nurse and the goings-on at the Dianella Plaza
car park. The manner in which he gave
his evidence having been granted
immunity from prosecution was direct, clear and detailed.
Importantly
in respect of material issues, such as the lead up to the collision between the
two motorcycles, and the mechanics of
the collision, Mr Donaldson's
evidence was consistent across his evidence-in-chief (prior to being granted
immunity from prosecution)
and his cross-examination.
Importantly,
in respect of certain issues, it was consistent with the evidence given by
Professor Anderson, for example, the lane
in which he was travelling prior
to the collision, and his radius into the
set out my findings of fact arising from Mr Donaldson's evidence in
6.3 Credibility findings Mr Nurse
was also not before the court as a person of prior good character. Like
Mr Donaldson, Mr Nurse also has an extensive criminal
smorgasbord of offences including drug offences (possession of heroin,
methylamphetamine and cannabis and conspiracy to sell
or supply a prohibited
drug), weapons offences, breaching court orders (Family Violence Restraining
Orders and breach of bail), escape
lawful custody, armed robbery, attempted
robbery whilst armed, robbery whilst armed, aggravated burglary, trespass,
offences of dishonesty
(gains a benefit by fraud and possession of stolen or
unlawfully obtained property) and a plethora of traffic offences.
has been sentenced to a number of significant periods of immediate imprisonment
over the past 25 years. It is trite to
say that Mr Nurse is no
stranger to the criminal justice system.
Mr Nurse's criminal history was tendered into evidence, he was not
cross-examined on any relevant convictions and no submissions
were made as to
the relevance of any (or all) of his convictions in my assessment of
Mr Nurse as a witness.
the time that Mr Nurse rode his motorcycle on 12 September 2020 he did
not have a valid driver's licence, and he had a blood reading
positive to both
methylamphetamine and amphetamine, although to a lesser extent than
Mr Donaldson.
observations I make above in respect of Mr Donaldson apply equally to
Mr Nurse. It also does not follow that simply because
Mr Nurse has a
long criminal record, or that he had drugs in his system at the time that the
accident occurred or that he had, on
his own admission, a long-term addiction to
heroin, that I must automatically reject everything that he said in his
evidence. Again,
this is not a trial about Mr Nurse's moral compass and I
am not to assess his evidence through a lens clouded by judgment and
is also trite to say, however, that those features of the evidence at trial and
Mr Nurse's evidence in general, like Mr Donaldson,
raise a number of
in mind that in his action against Mr Donaldson, Mr Nurse bears the
onus of proving on the balance of probabilities that
Mr Donaldson was
negligent, I have paid careful attention to whether I am able to accept
parts of Mr Nurse's evidence and to reject
other parts of his
with my approach to Mr Donaldson's evidence I scrutinise
Mr Nurse's evidence with great care in determining what, if any,
aspects of his evidence I am able to accept.
the extent that I reject aspects of Mr Nurse's evidence I have questioned
whether those aspects relate to significant matters
or whether they relate to
peripheral matters. I scrutinise whether any aspects of Mr Nurse's
evidence that I reject are confined
to single or discrete issues, or whether
they permeate the entirety of Mr Nurse's evidence.
was not an impressive witness. He was truculent, argumentative, evasive and, on
occasion, unresponsive. I found his evidence
to be in parts embellished and
contrived, and in other parts simply dishonest.
did not consider that Mr Nurse gave evidence which was honest, accurate nor
is necessary to say something about my approach to the medical notes tendered
into evidence at trial in respect of Mr Nurse's
post-accident admission to
hospital. As is plain from the summary of Mr Nurse's evidence earlier,
there were many references in
the medical notes made by Royal Perth Hospital
staff to Mr Nurse having consumed heroin prior to the accident.
am not satisfied on the balance of probabilities that Mr Nurse did in fact
have heroin in his system at the time of the accident.
Mr Nurse's own admission in his evidence, the contemporaneous medical
notes referencing him having taken heroin before the accident
or having 'heroin
on board' at the time of the accident were not accurate.
those notes do reflect, and as Mr Nurse admitted in his evidence at trial,
is that following the accident Mr Nurse lied to hospital
staff about being
affected by heroin at the time of the accident. He admitted that he had
done so in order to benefit his own interests
through being given stronger or
better pain relief.
Mr Nurse was prepared to, and did, lie to hospital staff following the
accident does demonstrate that he was a person prepared
to lie when necessary to
further his own ends. Whilst this is not determinative of my assessment of
Mr Nurse's evidence as a whole,
it is part of the mix of factors
that I take into account in assessing his overall credibility.
importantly in my assessment of Mr Nurse's evidence as a whole was a
combination of the following: his evasiveness in answering
questions, his
attempts to qualify positive prior statements made to Dr Goodheart and
Dr De Felice about the details of the accident,
his explanation as to
why critical aspects of the accident were not given to those medical
practitioners, specifically, that he was
'rear-ended' by Mr Donaldson, the
conflicting nature at times about which aspects of the accident he did, and did
not remember, the
totality of the evidence that indicated that he had no memory
of the details of the accident for many months, including as long after
accident as 20 months, and his own admission under cross-examination that
his memory was 'reconstructed' over
reconstructed having read the expert report of
Professor Anderson.
find that those aspects of Mr Nurse's evidence that I have found to be
neither honest, accurate nor reliable go not only to peripheral
discrete areas of the issues to be determined in this trial, but to the
very issues in dispute in this trial. That is,
what occurred in the lead up to,
and at the point of, the collision between the two motorcycles.
conclude in respect of Mr Nurse's evidence that this is not a case where I
am able to accept some of Mr Nurse's evidence and to
reject other aspects
of his evidence. With one very narrow exception which relates to
Mr Nurse's evidence that his last memory was
braking as he came into the
corner, I conclude that the remainder of Mr Nurse's evidence was neither
honest, accurate or reliable.
Unfortunately
for Mr Nurse false in one thing does mean false in everything.
give my reasons for rejecting Mr Nurse's evidence in
FINDINGS OF FACT MR DONALDSON'S EVIDENCE
7.1 The meeting at the Dianella Plaza car park
Mr Donaldson
and Mr Nurse were known to each other. Mr Donaldson was a dealer in
illicit substances, a fact known then known to
Mr Nurse. In the early
hours of 12 September 2020, Mr Nurse contacted Mr Donaldson
asking for the supply of illicit drugs on credit.
two men met at the Dianella Plaza car park around 4.00 am for the
purposes of Mr Donaldson supplying Mr Nurse with illicit drugs.
Mr Donaldson
had Mr Nurse's contact details saved into his phone as 'Troy, Johnny's
mate' ending in 125. That was a phone number
used by Mr Nurse at the time.
That Mr Nurse's contact details were saved under a different name on
Mr Donaldson's phone is entirely
consistent with their relationship which I
find to be of drug dealer (Mr Donaldson) and drug user
(Mr Nurse).
the extent that it is necessary to do so, I find that Mr Donaldson took a
photograph of Mr Nurse lying on the ground at the Dianella
car park to send to his girlfriend as his 'alibi', or excuse, for not being
at home in the early hours of 12 September 2020.
To that extent I accept
that the photograph at Exhibit 1 is Mr Nurse. Nothing turns on this.
am not able to make a definitive finding that both men consumed illicit
substances in the car park (as opposed to elsewhere earlier
in the night or the
previous night) but conclude that it is likely that they both did so. The drug
was likely to be methylamphetamine.
reach that conclusion for three reasons. Firstly, the very point of the meeting
at 4.00 am was for a drug deal. It had nothing
to do with discussing
repairs to Mr Nurse's motorcycle. Secondly, I accept Mr Donaldson's
evidence which was to the effect that
he gave Mr Nurse illicit drugs and
that Mr Nurse 'had his gear' in the car park. Thirdly, in respect of both
men, that each returned
positive blood results to the presence of
methylamphetamine and amphetamine after the accident.
respect of Mr Donaldson, his blood results were positive to amphetamine
(0.06 mg/L) and positive to methylamphetamine
(0.24 mg/L).
the time of the collision, Mr Donaldson rode with methylamphetamine and
amphetamine in his system regardless of precisely when
those substances were
7.2 The arrangements upon leaving Dianella Plaza car park
do not accept Mr Donaldson's evidence that after meeting Mr Nurse at
the Dianella Plaza car park he was heading to Armadale 'to
aftermarket motorcycle foot pegs for a mate at his girlfriend's place to be
picked up' and 'to say goodbye to his girlfriend
for the weekend' before he was
heading to Bunbury to see his daughter.
am unable to make a finding as to where Mr Donaldson was headed, having
left Dianella Plaza car park, other than that he was heading
south along
Alexander Drive.
turns on this because I do not find that the two men had an arrangement to
travel together to an address in Havelock Street
in West Perth to source
illicit drugs. To the extent that Mr Nurse's evidence suggested that that
was the plan I reject it.
is because, firstly, Mr Nurse told a number of lies in his evidence which
tainted the honesty, accuracy and reliability of his
evidence as a whole.
Secondly, because I have found that Mr Donaldson had already supplied
Mr Nurse with illicit drugs, likely methylamphetamine,
in the Dianella
Plaza car park. Thirdly, to the extent that there was any
suggestion that it was to source heroin, Mr Donaldson
already had heroin on
him, as evidenced by police finding heroin in his wallet after the accident.
Fourthly, I find that the relationship
between Mr Donaldson and
Mr Nurse was that of dealer and user. There was no evidence that the two
men were friends or had a relationship
outside of dealer-user. Fifthly, I
accept from the (candid) admission made by Mr Donaldson in his evidence to
the effect that as
the dealer, he had his own sources of illicit drugs.
find that Mr Donaldson left the car park first.
am not persuaded on the balance of probabilities that the two men left Dianella
Plaza car park to ride southbound together. That
Mr Nurse then
also headed south along Alexander Drive does not compel me to conclude that the
two men had a plan to, and were, travelling
together. Another inference also
open on the evidence is that Mr Donaldson simply left the car park and
headed south and Mr Nurse,
independently of Mr Donaldson, also headed
7.3 The lead-up to the collision
follows from the above that I am satisfied on the balance of probabilities that
up until the Thongsbridge Street intersection,
Mr Donaldson was not riding
his motorcycle alongside, behind or otherwise together with Mr Nurse.
find that 'on the approach to the bend', Mr Donaldson was travelling in the
left-hand lane on the far left-hand side of the dual
carriageway on Alexander
Drive, travelling south in a path that followed the curvature of the road
consistent with the path marked
by Mr Donaldson on
was little traffic on the road at the time and the weather was clear but dark.
Mr Donaldson's motorcycle had a functioning
headlight that illuminated the
black and white arrow sign as Mr Donaldson approached the bend.
Mr Donaldson was within plain sight of the black and white arrow sign at
the intersection, he heard an unexpected loud noise
coming from his right-hand
infer from what happened next that the noise came from Mr Nurse's
motorcycle approaching Mr Donaldson's motorcycle from Mr Donaldson's
right-hand side. There is no other explanation reasonably open on the
find that Mr Nurse then overtook Mr Donaldson from Mr Donaldson's
right-hand side. He did so without any prior warning to Mr Donaldson.
find that Mr Nurse cut across Mr Donaldson's line of travel,
such that Mr Nurse was then in the left-hand lane directly in front
Mr Donaldson's motorcycle.
accept as accurate the markings drawn by Mr Donaldson on
depicting his approach to the bend (marked in green) and, at the point of
intersection between the two motorcycles, Mr Nurse's line
of travel (marked
in red). This is subject only to the qualification I give below about the
accuracy of Mr Donaldson's marking of
the point of the collision between
the motorcycles: see [7.4].
find that Mr Nurse cut across Mr Donaldson's line of travel taking a
straighter line into the bend from right to left than the
wider arc in which
Mr Donaldson was then
travelling.
accept Mr Donaldson's evidence that as Mr Nurse cut across his line of
travel, Mr Nurse put his legs down as if he was bracing
for impact.
evidence, which I accept in this narrow part (only), is that he started
braking 'to hit the
therefore find that Mr Nurse braked as he entered the corner.
accept Mr Donaldson's evidence that at the point at which Mr Nurse cut
across Mr Donaldson's line of travel, Mr Donaldson was committed
riding the right-hand
find further, consistent with Mr Donaldson's evidence, that the effect of
Mr Nurse cutting across Mr Donaldson's line of travel
at that location
on the bend was that Mr Donaldson was 'squeezed in' and that he had nowhere
accept Mr Donaldson's evidence that the manner in which Mr Nurse cut
across Mr Donaldson's line of travel resulted in Mr Donaldson
insufficient time and space to change his
avoid colliding with Mr Nurse's motorcycle.
am unable to make a finding one way or the other as to whether Mr Donaldson
in fact braked as Mr Nurse cut across him. Mr Donaldson
was unsure in
his evidence whether 'he hit the skids or not,' which I take to be him being
uncertain if he braked or
Mr Donaldson
was not asked to explain in his evidence-in-chief whether he did, or did not,
brake and he was not cross-examined about
whether he braked.
the circumstances whilst the possibility is open that Mr Donaldson braked,
it is not the only inference open on the evidence before
me. Another competing
inference is that Mr Donaldson did not brake because he had insufficient
time to do so.
Ultimately,
I am unable to make a finding either way as to whether Mr Donaldson did or
did not brake, prior to colliding with Mr
Nurse's rear
7.4 The collision between the two motorcycles
find consistent with Professor Anderson's evidence that as at the point of
collision between the motorcycles each was in the midst
of a cornering
That is consistent which Mr Donaldson's evidence which I accept.
I accept as accurate Mr Donaldson's markings depicting his and
Mr Nurse's respective lines of travel on Exhibit 2, I find
that the point
of collision between the two motorcycles was likely slightly further north than
the point of intersection of the two
motorcycles as marked by Mr Donaldson
on Exhibit 2.
is because I accept Professor Anderson's unchallenged evidence that the
point of collision between the two motorcycles was likely
somewhere along
the 10-m black line as indicated on
Photograph 3.
refer to my analysis in [2.2] in concluding that the point of collision was
likely somewhere between 20 m - 30 m north of where
motorcycles impacted with the
That is consistent with Professor Anderson's evidence which I accept.
the extent that there is any difference between the point of collision as marked
by Mr Donaldson on Exhibit 2 and the evidence
Professor Anderson consistent with Photograph
consider that it is material. That is for three reasons.
Mr Donaldson's oral evidence was that Mr Nurse cut across his line of
travel approximately 20 m - 30 m back from the bend.
is broadly consistent with the evidence given by Professor Anderson as to
the likely point of collision between the two
motorcycles.
Photograph 3
depicting the 10-m stretch of road where the two motorcycles likely collided is
an arial depiction of Alexander Drive on the approach
to the bend. Exhibit 2 is
a street view photograph of the approach to the bend. Mr Donaldson
was asked during the course of giving
his evidence to mark that street view
photograph showing his line of travel and that of Mr Nurse leading to the
point of collision
between the motorcycles. To that end, the perspective
of the street view on Exhibit 2 as marked by Mr Donaldson differs from the
perspective of the aerial view in Photograph 3.
Mr Donaldson's markings at Exhibit 2 made during the course of giving his
evidence was an exercise in demonstrating, in
general terms, the respective
lines of travel of the two motorcycles into the bend and where the two
motorcycles collided. That
exercise was not an exercise in precision
am satisfied on the balance of probabilities that the collision between the two
motorcycles occurred as Mr Donaldson described
in his evidence.
am satisfied on the balance of probabilities that the front right-hand tyre of
Mr Donaldson's motorcycle hit the left-hand side
of the rear wheel of
motorcycle.
am satisfied of that because Mr Donaldson's evidence about the mechanics of
the collision was precise and consistent throughout
his evidence. It was not
successfully challenged in cross-examination.
it is entirely consistent with his evidence that Mr Nurse had cut across
his line of travel from right to left in circumstances
where Mr Donaldson
was then committed to riding the right-hand bend. That is, that
Mr Donaldson was then engaged in a cornering
manoeuvre which, logically
from the right-hand bend in the road, was a manoeuvre in which he was then
riding his motorcycle to navigate
towards the right.
Mr Donaldson's account about the mechanics of the collision is consistent
with his evidence that Mr Nurse rode straight
past him and cut him
am satisfied that Mr Donaldson did not then expect Mr Nurse to appear
from his right, neither did he expect Mr Nurse to cut across
his line of
light of where Mr Donaldson then was on the approach to the bend, I am
satisfied that Mr Nurse's manner of driving gave Mr Donaldson
insufficient time, space and warning to change his direction and to avoid
hitting Mr Nurse's rear
am satisfied from Professor Anderson's evidence that Mr Donaldson's
account of the mechanics of the two motorcycles colliding is
not inconsistent
with the physical evidence from the crash scene. Specifically, that it is not
inconsistent with Mr Nurse's motorcycle
colliding with the barrier front-on
at F1 on Photograph
explain my reasoning in this respect in [9.9] and
find that Mr Donaldson's motorcycle collided with the guardrail at F2 on
Photograph 5.
Mr Donaldson was then thrown over the guardrail, landing on the pavement as
shown on Photograph
FINDINGS OF FACT FROM MR NURSE'S EVIDENCE
8.1 The events prior to the accident
made the findings of fact from Mr Donaldson's evidence above, and in light
of the general observations I have made earlier
it is apparent that I reject his evidence in its entirety with the very narrow
exception identified.
are my detailed reasons as to why I reject Mr Nurse's evidence.
do not accept as plausible the evidence that Mr Nurse gave that the reason
he met up with Mr Donaldson at 4.00 am on 12 September
because Mr Nurse had been 'working on his motorcycle' and that
Mr Donaldson 'knew more about motorcycles than he did'.
That evidence
was wholly unconvincing and untruthful. The only rational inference open on all
the evidence is that Mr Nurse met
with Mr Donaldson for the purposes
of obtaining, and taking, illicit drugs.
am satisfied on the balance of probabilities that Mr Donaldson did supply
Mr Nurse with illicit drugs (likely methylamphetamine)
in the Dianella
Plaza car park.
is for four reasons. Firstly, that was the very point of the meeting.
Secondly, that finding is consistent with Mr Nurse's
positive blood test
results after the accident (methylamphetamine (0.1 mg/L) and amphetamine
(0.02 mg/L)). Thirdly, I accept from
Mr Donaldson's evidence that he
had given Mr Nurse his 'stuff' and that Mr Nurse 'had his gear'
at the Dianella Plaza car park.
Fourthly whilst Mr Nurse was
cross-examined about taking amphetamine and/or heroin in the car park, both
of which he denied, he was
not cross-examined specifically about having taken
methylamphetamine in the car park.
have referred earlier to my finding that I am not satisfied on the balance of
probabilities that Mr Nurse had consumed heroin prior
to the accident.
This is a pleaded particular of negligence in Mr Donaldson's claim against
These are the reasons for that finding.
Mr Nurse's blood test results after the accident did not show a positive
was no expert evidence to the effect that a negative result to heroin did not
necessarily contraindicate the taking of heroin
some hours earlier.
in so far as Mr Nurse told hospital staff after the accident that he had
taken heroin, those statements were likely untruths
told by Mr Nurse to
obtain stronger pain relief.
Mr Nurse was cross-examined specifically about taking heroin or amphetamine
in the car park, both of which he denied. Whilst
I do not accept
Mr Nurse as a witness of the truth, this aspect of his evidence is
consistent with the post-accident blood test results.
find Mr Nurse's very specific evidence at trial that he had used drugs
72 hours, but not 24
the accident as being contrived and not honest evidence.
circumstances where I conclude from the totality of his evidence that
Mr Nurse had no recollection of the events of the
implausible that he is able to state five years later with such accuracy the
window within which he did, and did not, take
illicit drugs prior to the
accident. It is hardly the case that this was an isolated act by Mr Nurse
of taking illicit drugs so
as to be memorable. It follows that I reject
Mr Nurse's evidence about having consumed illicit drugs 72 hours but
not 24 hours prior
to the accident as false and contrived.
light of the credibility issues that tainted Mr Nurse's evidence, and as
noted earlier, I do not accept Mr Nurse's evidence that
there was an
agreement for Mr Donaldson to follow Mr Nurse to a friend's house in
Havelock Street in West Perth.
with the findings of fact I have made in respect of Mr Donaldson, I do not
accept that Mr Nurse and Mr Donaldson had planned
to, or were,
travelling together on the route southbound. I am not able to make a
definitive finding as to where either man was
travelling.
went by the alias 'Troy Craven'. The telephone number XXX XXXX 125 was a
telephone number that was used by Mr Nurse. Nothing
turns on this finding
other than Mr Nurse's denials in his evidence, at least initially, that
this was his number or a number he
used, goes to his
8.2 Mr Nurse's account of the accident
find that the evidence that Mr Nurse gave at trial about the events leading
up to the accident, and of the accident itself, to
be neither honest, accurate
or reliable.
find that the totality of the evidence is such that after the accident
Mr Nurse was unable to recall the events of the accident.
find that Mr Nurse had no memory of events when he spoke to ambulance
officers at the
had no recollection of the accident when in hospital after the accident in
September 2020 and that he continued to have no
memory of the accident as at
14 December 2021, some 15 months later, when he spoke to
Dr Goodheart and some 20 months later when
he spoke to
Dr De Felice.
totality of the medical evidence is such that Mr Nurse told various medical
practitioners and healthcare professionals over a
period of nearly two years
that he, in effect, had no memory of the accident. I reach that conclusion
from a combination of the
the St John Ambulance Patient care record which was the most contemporaneous
account of events after the accident records
unable to recall
unable to state
other hospital records which come later in time, the St John Ambulance Patient
care record does not suffer from the same reliability
issues that I find to be
the case with other hospital notes by reason of (later) health care
professionals adopting statements from
earlier records that may not have been
the purposes of this analysis, I do not take into account other medical notes
referencing Mr Nurse's amnesia to events made during
admission to Royal Perth Hospital because I cannot exclude that those notes
simply repeated an earlier recorded entry
to this effect.
respect of the St John Ambulance Patient Care
Mr Nurse agreed in his evidence that it was recorded after the accident
that he was unable to recall the events at that point in
evidence in cross-examination about being spoken to by ambulance officers after
the accident was that he did not recall
it. He said that he was 'severely
concussed at the
he 'copped a pretty severe blow to the head that night after the actual impact I
don't remember much until I woke up in
To the extent that the St John Ambulance Patient care record
records that Mr Nurse stated that he was unable to recall events,
is consistent with other statements made by Mr Nurse many
months after the accident.
evidence reflects on 14 December 2021, some 15 months after the accident,
Mr Nurse told the consultant neurologist, Dr Goodheart,
that he had
o particular recollection of events immediately before or after the
agreed that that is what he told Dr Goodheart. I find that
Mr Nurse told Dr Goodheart this because it was the truth.
accept the content of Dr Goodheart's letter to Mr Nurse's solicitor
Simon Walters to accurately reflect what Mr Nurse told Dr Goodheart
14 December
that Mr Nurse told Dr Goodheart those facts because they were
reject the evidence given by Mr Nurse in cross-examination when he tried to
qualify the statement given to Dr Goodheart that he
had no particular
recollection of events immediately before or after the accident.
evidence was not entirely consistent about which parts of the accident he did
and did not remember. He agreed that he
had no particular recollection of the
it was put to him that he had no particular recollection of events immediately
before or after the accident Mr Nurse sought
to qualify that statement by
saying 'Immediately being probably several seconds before and seconds after the
challenged in cross-examination that he had not put that qualification on his
recollection when speaking to Dr Goodheart Mr
well he didn't ask. We were there about my neurological problems, sleeping and
nightmares and all that.
evidence in cross-examination at times conflicted as to which events he did
remember. Whilst he accepted that when he
saw Dr Goodheart in December
2021 he had no memory 'of the time of collision, no', he then
But events leading up to it, yes and then shortly after. But around the time of
the actual impact or the collision - because Shaun
was behind me- So I didn't
see him hit me from behind---and then you guys got your engineer's report that
explained it a bit more
for me as well. So as information came to light I began
to piece things together.
the evidence reflects that nearly 20 months after the accident he told the
consultant psychiatrist Dr De Felice that his last
memory was coming
to a right-hand bend and braking to go around the
Mr Nurse agreed in cross-examination that that is what he told
Dr De Felice and that was his last
that Mr Nurse told Dr De Felice that because it was the
find that Mr Nurse's statement to Dr De Felice in May 2022 that
he had what he thought were 'patchy glimpses' was accurate. That
May 2022, he did not have a clear recollection of events.
reject the evidence that Mr Nurse gave that, in effect, what he meant by
having no memory of the collision as at the time he spoke
Dr De Felice was a reference to having no memory 'of the impact,
no, because I was hit from behind'. I reject that evidence as
and as an attempt to explain the statements made to Dr De Felice.
did not tell either Dr Goodheart or Dr De Felice that he was hit
from behind.
reject Mr Nurse's evidence that his memory has returned over time.
conclude that Mr Nurse had no recollection of the events leading up to and
including the point of collision between the two motorcycles.
find that Mr Nurse's evidence that he was hit from behind was not a memory
that he held at all, or a memory that was honestly held.
agreed in cross-examination that he had tried to piece together the
circumstances of the accident since it
On Mr Nurse's own evidence he had reconstructed his 'memory'
find further that Mr Nurse's specific account of being hit by
Mr Donaldson from behind was an account that Mr Nurse reconstructed
having received Professor Anderson's report. He admitted as much in
cross-examination when challenged that he had not told Dr De
that he was hit from behind. He then
Well it was only your engineer's report. That's what told me
agreed in cross-examination that the reason he was giving evidence in this case
was to say that he
remember being rear-ended. He agreed with that
proposition
denied that it was to further his compensation claim.
conceded in his evidence that he had recollection of the events leading to the
that the starting point was that he has no
recollection.
summary, with one exception, I reject the evidence that Mr Nurse gave about
the lead up to the accident and the accident itself
as being not honest,
accurate or reliable.
only aspect of Mr Nurse's evidence that I accept was accurate was his
evidence that his last memory was applying the brake as
he was going around the
was accepted by Mr Nurse in his evidence as being the truth.
find that as Mr Nurse cut across Mr Donaldson's path Mr Nurse was
slowing down and had braked. I reach that conclusion from a
combination of the
(a) Mr Donaldson's evidence that I accept that at
the point of cutting across Mr Donaldson's path Mr Nurse had his legs
down 'as if
bracing for contact';
(b) Mr Nurse's evidence that he 'braked or started braking to hit the
(c) Mr Nurse told Dr De Felice in May 2022 that his last
memory was applying the brake as he was going around the
accept that narrow aspect of Mr Nurse's evidence (only) because that is
consistent with what he told Dr De Felice in May 2022,
in circumstances where there was no reason to not tell De Felice the
follows from the findings above that, with the one narrow exception outlined, I
reject Mr Nurse's account of the collision and
the events leading up to the
collision as being neither honest, accurate or
THE EXPERT EVIDENCE OF PROFESSOR ANDERSON
9.1 Professor Anderson's expertise
Professor Anderson
holds a PhD in Mechanical Engineering from the University of Adelaide. He
undertook crash injury biomechanics
and road accident research between 1993 and
2014 at the University of Adelaide. He held a position as a research academic
Road Accident Research Unit and the Centre for Automotive Safety
Research becoming Deputy Director in 2002 and is an Adjunct Associate
Professor at the University of
Professor Anderson
has published more than 150 reports, journal articles and conference papers in
road and vehicle safety, impact
injury biomechanics, head injury, pedestrian
crash kinematics and crash mechanics. His areas of specialisation have included
injury biomechanics, pedestrian crash simulations and reconstruction,
general crash investigation and reconstruction, evaluation
of automotive systems
and road safety strategies, laboratory testing including automotive restraint
systems and pedestrian sub system
impact testing. He has been a reviewer for
many international academic
was no challenge to the expertise and qualifications of Professor Anderson.
I therefore accept him as an expert witness in
the area of crash
reconstruction.
9.2 Credibility findings Professor Anderson
Professor Anderson
was an impressive witness. With two minor exceptions only, his opinions and
conclusions were clearly articulated.
Those exceptions involved, firstly, a
lack of distinction between the terms that were used to describe the collision
(between the
motorcycles, as I have defined it) and the collision with the
barrier (which I have referred to as the impact with the barrier).
course of giving his oral evidence Professor Anderson did clarify which
part of the sequence of events he was referring to.
only other aspect to Professor Anderson's evidence that was not clear
related to a lack of precision as to what he meant by references
to 'high speed'
or 'excessive speed'. In fairness to Professor Anderson he was not asked
either in evidence-in-chief or cross-examination
what he meant by those
references in terms of kilometres per hour. Perhaps it is my desire to
understand those terms referenced
to a benchmark that I readily understand.
I refer to this aspect later in these reasons.
of those points cause me to have any doubt about the accuracy or reliability of
Professor Anderson's evidence. As noted
they both come down to the
terminology used as opposed to the conclusions that Professor Anderson
note further that where any conclusion was premised upon an assumption,
Professor Anderson made that fact (and the assumption)
Professor Anderson
did not attempt to overstate his findings. Where there were limitations to his
ability to give an opinion on
a particular aspect of the collision he did not
attempt to guess or speculate. He made it clear when he was unable to give a
view either way.
formed the impression from Professor Anderson's evidence that he
demonstrated the impartiality that the court expects of an expert
he was asked for his opinion on matters outside of his
Professor Anderson was readily able to give his opinion which demonstrated
to me his expertise and his mastery of the subject matter
upon which he was
giving his evidence. This was particularly highlighted when answering questions
from the court at the conclusion
of his evidence.
accept Professor Anderson's evidence in its
9.3 Summary of Professor Anderson's evidence
will summarise Professor Anderson's evidence in the following sections:
location of the motorcycles at the point of collision.
physical evidence from the crash scene.
trajectory between the collision and the impact with the barrier.
points of impact of each motorcycle with the barrier.
mechanics of the collision between the two
motorcycles.
9.4 The location the motorcycles at the point of collision
refer to [2.2] as to the geographical location of where the two motorcycles
likely collided.
Professor Anderson
said that the positioning of the motorcycles prior to the collision was not
clear from the physical evidence in
that there were no marks on the road that
indicated any specific collision
Professor Anderson gave his opinion that both motorcycles were likely in
the left lane and heading towards the corner when
they lost control and hit the
reaching that conclusion Professor Anderson extrapolated or prolongated the
line of the pre-collision marks on the road, noting
that there was a clear line
between the black marks that were near the nose of the kerb at the exit of the
side street on Thongsbridge
Street and the point of
Professor Anderson extended that line back and then drew a line which was
the tangent at the beginning of the curve. This is depicted
in Photograph
which shows
the line of travel consistent with the pre-crash marks left at the scene.
two yellow lines indicate the straight path towards the point of impact and the
tangent to the beginning of the curve. The point
at which the line intersects
with the tangent to the bend is about 17 north-east of the point of impact
with the barrier. Professor
Anderson's evidence was that the point at
which the (yellow) lines meet is plausibly the point at which the motorcycles
became destabilised
his oral evidence at trial Professor Anderson clarified that the point of
impact between the two motorcycles must have been within
point of intersection between the black line and the yellow line, likely
somewhere along the length of the black
clarified that the point was possibly slightly
or to the north of the point of intersection between the black and
yellow lines on Photograph
Professor Anderson
explained the two motorcycles had gone at least part of the way around the curve
in the road at the point at which
they had capsized and were sliding towards the
is because otherwise the motorcycles would have taken a different line. If they
had capsized earlier, before the curve, Professor
Anderson said that the
motorcycles would have gone to the left of the barrier. If they had been even
further round the bend, Professor
Anderson said that they would not have
hit the barrier at all and they would have just slid down the road.
Professor Anderson concluded
that that 'kind of constrains the point of
collision to a certain
Professor Anderson
said that it would take a third of a second to capsize onto the road after being
destabilised.
Professor Anderson
concluded that the motorcycles must have been in the left-hand lane as they came
down onto the road surface or
had lost steering
of those opinions were challenged at trial and I accept
9.5 The physical evidence from the crash scene
9.5.1 Final positions
approximate path of Mr Donaldson after the impact with the barrier is
depicted by the yellow arrow on Photograph
arrow to the south-west indicating the path of Mr Nurse after impact.
post-impact crash scene
(Photograph 6)
shows at A where Mr Donaldson ended up on the footpath, at B
Mr Nurse's position post-impact on the road, at C and D the final resting
places of the motorcycles.
Professor Anderson
noted that all roadway evidence was contained within an area that is 21 m
long and 10 m
9.5.2 The damage to the motorcycles and the barrier
Mr Donaldson's
motorcycle sustained damage to the right-side faring, consistent with an impact
to the side or underside of the motorcycle.
The rider's seat was dislodged but
the motorcycle was otherwise relatively free of collision
Honda sustained more damage than Mr Donaldson's Yamaha, sustaining
extensive damage to the frame at the top of the forks
and around the handlebars.
Components around the handlebars were broken away, consistent with a heavy
frontal impact to that area:
see Photograph 7, Annexure
were two areas of damage to the curved section of the barrier below the hazard
board that resulted from the impact of the motorcycles
with the barrier. The
most significant damage and associated debris indicate the Honda's point of
impact (F1 on Photograph 5), with
the lighter damage related to the impact from
the Yamaha (F2 on
Photograph 5).
These are highlighted in yellow on Photographs 10 and
of those opinions were challenged at trial and I accept
9.6 The trajectory between the collision and the impact with the barrier
Professor Anderson's
evidence was that both motorcycles capsized onto the road after being
destabilised
and slid towards the barrier.
Professor Anderson
identified that there were marks on the road moving in the direction of the
barrier and they are consistent with
a motorcycle in the process of
Professor Anderson
said that the motorcycle that made these marks (the Honda) 'likely was not
upright when it hit the
of these opinions were challenged at trial and I accept
9.7 The points of impact of each motorcycle with the barrier
Professor Anderson
concluded that Mr Nurse's Honda impacted with the barrier at F1 on
Photograph 5
for the following reasons:
(a) the damage to the barrier at F1 was
the heaviest and was consistent with a square
the motorcycle) than the second area of damage at F2;
(b) the damage to the Honda was consistent with the 'square on' impact at F1
and that F1 was consistent with a 'less glancing impact'
(c) the damage to the Honda was significantly more than the damage to
Mr Donaldson's Yamaha;
(d) the Honda was likely to have gone straight into the barrier, more or less
but that it was probably not upright at that
(e) the most significant damage and associated debris likely indicate the
Honda's point of impact, with the lighter damage related
to the impact from the
Yamaha; and
(f) the location of the debris on the road at that point
consistent (only) with the Honda and not the Yamaha.
Professor Anderson's
opinion on the Honda's point of impact with the barrier was not challenged at
trial and I accept it.
Professor Anderson
concluded that Mr Donaldson's Yamaha most likely hit the barrier at F2
(Photograph 5), and that he was thrown
either over the board or just to the
right of it.
Professor Anderson reached this conclusion from a combination of the
(a) the damage to the guardrail at F2 was lighter than
the damage at F1, described as being a 'more glancing impact' than at
(b) the damage to the Yamaha was significantly less than the damage to the
(c) the trajectory around F1 was consistent only with the Honda and not with
the Yamaha; and
(d) the Yamaha travelled further after impacting with the barrier showing
that the Yamaha had more residual energy after the collision
Professor Anderson's
opinion on the Yamaha's point of impact with the barrier was not challenged at
trial and I accept it.
9.8 Professor Anderson's evidence regarding speed
Professor Anderson
gave his opinion on the issue of speed in two respects. The first was the
maximum cornering speed at which a
motorcycle could safely negotiate the
right-hand bend without sliding or otherwise losing control. The second was the
likely speed
at which Mr Donaldson and Mr Nurse were travelling
immediately before the bend in the
9.8.1 The maximum cornering speed
firstly with the maximum speed a motorcyclist could traverse the corner on which
the accident
Professor Anderson's evidence was that the maximum cornering speed of a
motorcycle is influenced by a combination of factors including
rider skill,
motorcycle design, and road conditions.
key determinants of maximum corner speed include the coefficient of friction
between the tyres and the road surface, which is
affected by road
texture, tyre composition and whether the surface is wet or dry, and the camber
or crossfall of the road. Different
motorcycles may also have different
cornering capabilities.
typical maximum lateral cornering acceleration achievable by a normal rider
before a motorcycle begins to slide is often in the
range of 0.6
g - 0.85 g under ideal conditions. This figure represents the
traction available between the tyre and the road.
a motorcycle is under braking, the maximum lateral acceleration that it can
achieve without sliding is reduced. This is due
to the fact that braking forces
shift the motorcycle's weight forward onto the front wheel, thereby reducing the
grip available on
the rear wheel. The total available traction from the tyres
must also be shared between braking and cornering forces, this balance
visualised in the form of a traction circle or friction
combined braking and cornering forces must not exceed the maximum friction
available between the tyres and the road. If appreciable
braking force is
applied by the rider, the available traction for cornering will
lateral traction demand when cornering depends on speed and the radius of the
turn. The higher the speed or the tighter the
radius, the greater the
demand on the motorcycle's tyres to provide the necessary lateral grip to
prevent sliding.
demand is quantified by the formula for centripetal acceleration, a =
is the centripetal acceleration,
is the velocity, and
is the turn radius. As the speed increases or the turn radius
decreases, the required centripetal force increases, which must be
countered by
the frictional force between the tyres and the road.
If this frictional force, or traction, is exceeded, the tyres
begin to slide, leading to a loss of control.
additional forces, such as braking or acceleration, will demand a share of
the available traction, thereby influencing the maximum
speed at which a
motorcycle can safely navigate a
equation for centripetal acceleration can be rearranged to give the cornering
speed. The centripetal acceleration can be expressed
as the product of maximum
traction (the sum of friction and the effect of the road camber) and
expression for the maximum cornering speed is then
maximum cornering speed,  is the coefficient of friction between the tyres
and the road surface,
is the camber of the road (in per cent),
is the acceleration due to gravity and
is the radius of the turn.
Professor Anderson
explained that this formula shows that the maximum speed at which a motorcycle
can navigate a curve without losing
traction is contingent upon the frictional
interaction with the road, the camber, the pull of gravity, which is constant,
curve's radius.
larger radius or higher friction allows for higher cornering speeds, whereas a
smaller radius or lower friction requires a reduction
in speed to maintain
control or prevent
the radius of the turn is known and an estimate of the available traction is
known, an estimate of speed can then be
calculated.
camber (superelevation) at the bend, as measured using photogrammetry tools at
Nearmap.com is about
Anderson demonstrated two possible radii a motorcyclist could use to negotiate
the turn on Alexander
The centreline radius is 86 m. If a rider started to the right of the
right lane and 'straightened the bend', moving to the left
edge of the left
lane, he concluded that it might be possible to increase the radius to
approximately 97 m.
two radii are depicted at Photograph
turn close to the radius of the centreline would have a radius of 86 m. It
might be possible to increase this to 98 m by straightening
Professor Anderson
indicated that a typical rider and motorcycle travelling in the left lane
approaching the bend would not likely
be able to exceed a speed of
84 km per hour without a high risk of losing control,
particularly if they braked as they reached the
rider who straightened the curve, increasing the radius to 98 m, could
negotiate the bend at a higher speed, up to about
a normal rider, the maximum speed without losing control, especially while
braking, would be around 84 km per hour for a normal
riding line with
a radius of 86 m.
a skilled rider who 'straightens the bend' to a radius of approximately
98 m, a speed up to 105 km per hour might be
achievable.
Professor Anderson
opined that if Mr Donaldson was travelling in the left lane,
84 km per hour is likely to represent the maximum
speed at which
the corner could be negotiated without a high risk of losing
9.8.2 The speed of the motorcycles on the approach to the bend
second aspect to speed on which Professor Anderson was asked to provide his
opinion was the likely speed at which Mr Donaldson
and Mr Nurse were
travelling just before the bend in the
take this to refer to the approach to the bend as defined in [2.2] above.
Professor Anderson's
opinion in respect of this second aspect of speed was reached following a
detailed analysis and reconstruction
from the physical evidence from the crash
opinion in respect of the likely speed of each motorcycle on the approach to the
bend was not premised upon, nor founded in any
way on, any of the materials
before him that contained oral statements as to speed. Neither was his opinion
based on the speedometer
reading of the Yamaha taken after the collision. I do
not therefore address those materials here. It is convenient for me to deal
with all of the other evidence and references to speed and how I deal with that
material in the Analysis section [Part
were four aspects of the physical evidence that were relevant to
Professor Anderson's reconstruction of the speed of the motorcycles.
were the distance the motorcycles slid after colliding with the barrier, the
impact between the motorcycles and the barrier,
the evidence of the skid and
scrape marks before the collision and the damage to the motorcycles.
each in turn.
the distance the motorcycles slid after colliding with the barrier can be
related to the energy dissipated as the motorcycles
slid over the surface.
Professor Anderson indicated that the speed as the motorcycles came off the
barrier could be
9.8.3 The speed of the Honda (Mr Nurse)
Professor Anderson
assumed that it was Mr Nurse's motorcycle (the Honda) which left the marks
on the road leading up to the point
of impact on the barrier which was
surrounded by motorcycle debris 'likely' from the
was no challenge at trial to that assumption underpinning
Professor Anderson's evidence in this regard. Having reviewed the
photographs of the Honda and the Yamaha and the photographs from the crash
reasonable inference to draw from the debris noted on the road and curb
proximate to the
matched the materials and colour of the Honda (and not the Yamaha).
inference is consistent with Professor Anderson's opinion that the Honda
impacted with the barrier at
finding was not contested at trial and is a finding of fact that I make.
Professor Anderson
gave evidence that it was possible to estimate the specific energy expended in
the pre-crash and post-crash phases
of the Honda's motion by multiplying the
deceleration of the sliding motorcycle and the
Professor Anderson
gave evidence that the Honda slid about 7 m before striking the
barrier and slid for 9 m after the impact.
That implied an initial speed of the Honda of
(provisionally) around
60 km per hour.
Professor Anderson
opined that, typically, motorcycles slide over road surfaces with an average
drag coefficient of about 0.45.
If this is applied over the
length of the tyre/drag marks, the energy dissipated is 0.45 x 9.81 x (7+9) = 71
joules per kg. The
speed loss associated with energy dissipation is given by
the expression
. If the loss during the impact is neglected
for the present, the speed loss associated with 71 joules per kg is 43
km per hour.
The speed loss in the post-crash phase would have
been approximately 32
km per hour.
to the second aspect, namely the impact with the barrier,
Professor Anderson indicated that the speed loss associated with
with the barrier would have depended on various factors, including the angle of
impact and the degree of engagement with
the barrier.
Professor Anderson
indicated that the angle of the Honda's impact with the barrier 'would have been
reasonably high' and there was
a reasonable degree of damage to the front of the
(Honda) motorcycle but no particular evidence of jagging between the (Honda)
Professor Anderson
stated that estimating how much energy was lost in the impact is difficult, but
that it was possible to provide
a rough estimate. For the purposes of the
calculations Professor Anderson assumed that the damage to the front of the
(Honda) motorcycle
was the same as the damage expected if a motorcycle slid
perpendicularly into a concrete barrier at about 40 km per hour and
to a complete stop.
assumption was not challenged at trial and I therefore accept it.
Professor Anderson
estimated that the energy dissipated in creating this damage would have been
= 62 joules per
Professor Anderson
noted that a rough estimate of the speed of the (Honda) before the crash could
be attained by adding the energy
lost in sliding to the energy lost in the
barrier impact ie
71 + 62 = 133 joules per kg.
Using the equation for change in velocity at
that would imply a
pre-crash speed of the Honda of 60 km per hour.
speed would have been after any braking before the motorcycle began to
skid/slide.
Professor Anderson's
opinion about the pre-crash speed of the Honda after any braking was not
challenged at trial and I therefore
9.8.4 The speed of the Yamaha (Mr Donaldson)
Professor Anderson
opined that the Yamaha's speed loss indicated a provisional collision speed of
60 km per hour.
Professor Anderson
noted that the damage to the Yamaha was less than the damage to the Honda. He
opined that it was therefore likely
that the speed loss in the Yamaha's impact
with the barrier was somewhat less than that of the Honda.
Yamaha ended up about 15 m from the likely barrier impact. If a drag of
0.45 is assumed over this distance, a
speed loss of about
41 km per hour is implied.
Considering
the additional energy that may have been lost as the Yamaha hit the barrier,
Professor Anderson indicated that it was
not likely, in his opinion, that
the (Yamaha) motorcycle hit the barrier at a speed that exceeded
60 km per hour. Whilst Professor
Anderson stated in his
report that this is the speed
any braking occurred before impact
with the barrier, I consider this to be an error for the reasons I give in
accept Professor Anderson's evidence that a crash at a very high speed that
dissipates a significant amount of energy typically
causes catastrophic damage
to the motorcycle and would also cause significant damage to the object struck.
He noted that whilst
there was damage to both motorcycles, the extent of damage
overall was not consistent with an impact of extreme
evidence does not preclude the possibility of a much higher speed approaching
the bend before braking, however, he noted that
there was no physical evidence
to support that
proposition.
Professor Anderson's
evidence in this regard was not challenged and I therefore accept
9.9 The mechanics of the collision
turn to address the evidence of Professor Anderson about the mechanics of
the collision, the sequence of events between the collision
motorcycles and the trajectory of the motorcycles into the barrier.
Professor Anderson
assumed from the narrative he had been given that a collision had occurred and
that was caused by some interaction
between the
motorcycles.
That fact is not in dispute in this trial.
Professor Anderson's
evidence was that it could be inferred from the location of the damage to
Mr Donaldson's motorcycle that there
was some impact on the right-hand
side, but that it is difficult to say in what phase that impact occurred,
whether the interaction
with Mr Nurse's motorcycle or the collision into
physical damage to Mr Donaldson's motorcycle does not therefore assist in
drawing any inferences as to the mechanics of the collision.
cross-examination Professor Anderson accepted that Mr Nurse's Honda
hit the guardrail 'more square on' than Mr Donaldson's Yamaha.
for Mr Nurse put to Professor Anderson in cross-examination, in
effect, that it was likely that the collision between the
two motorcycles
occurred by Mr Donaldson's motorcycle hitting Mr Nurse's motorcycle
from Mr Nurse's right-hand side (Hypothesis Two).
Professor Anderson
stated that either scenario (Hypothesis One or Hypothesis Two) was possible,
because 'the trajectories are unlikely
to have been sort of completely linear
following exchange then
Mr Clyne: But therefore on the balance of probabilities, is it not likely that
Mr Donaldson's bike was on the right-hand side of
Mr Nurse and forced
him into the barrier?---
A: The - because we don't - I - I - it's - I think either is possible, to be
honest, because the trajectories are unlikely to have
been sort of completely
linear from that point.
Mr Clyne: I understand that. But if he's gone straight in, it's unlikely
he was hit on the left because that would have forced him
out?---(No audible answer).
Mr Clyne: Mr Nurse was struck on the left-hand side. His bike is more
likely than not to have been forced to the right and end up
in a position
perhaps like Mr Donaldson's bike?---
A: I - I wouldn't say - that - that possibility is certainly not excluded by the
Mr Clyne: More probable than not?---A: -I don't think I could say that.
Mr Clyne: It's just that back when I went to school - and that's you know before
they had pens and things - we used to do physics.
And it used to be for
every action, there's an equal and opposite reaction?---A - Yes.
Mr Clyne: And so if Mr Nurse's bike was struck on the right-hand side, its
likely reaction is to force him to the left and into the
barrier?---A: -What you
say is correct. It's just that I think is at risk of oversimplifying what
happened before we have any physical
evidence for it because we don't know if
there was other steering inputs or anything else in response to what had
Mr Clyne: But on what we've got, I suggest it's more likely that
Mr Donaldson struck Mr Nurse from the right-hand side? A:
- all I can say - repeat is that I don't know if I could
say it on the balance of probabilities. All I could say is that what you
propose is not - certainly not excluded by the evidence. But I - it's one
of those aspects of the crash that I don't think I can
give a concluded opinion
Mr Clyne: And the scrape marks, as we can see on figure 9, would seem to
indicate that Mr Nurse's bike came from closer to the barrier
Mr Donaldson's bike before ending their final positions?
A---Yes, that would be reasonable to - to say.
re-examination Professor Anderson was asked what he meant in his evidence
What we - okay, so when I examined the evidence, well, obviously it was clear
that a - a collision had occurred and the narrative
is that that was caused by
some interaction between the bikes further from the corner, of which there's
sort of limited information.
Now, the possibilities are that that was
a significant collision or it may have just been a destabilising - in - some
sort of destabilising
interaction. So it's not necessarily the case that
the - that that collision would have been the only thing that set the
trajectories
into the barrier. So it's not uncommon if there's a - well, I'd
say it's certainly not uncommon if there's some sort of light(?)
interaction
(indistinct) attempt at regaining control before the bikes capsize. So
it's - we have - these bikes are also in the
midst of a cornering
manoeuvre. So application of the brake can cause a bike to stand up
straight and run wide. There are a number
of things that can happen
between what caused the initial destabilisation and really began hitting the
road before hitting the barrier,
of which we really have very little
information. And all - I'm just conscious in these sorts of accidents not
to sort of paint an
oversimplistic picture of what happened and give an opinion
on that, rather than just say well, all I can say is what's in front
of me---and
the things beforehand are somewhat unknown. But they could include
steering inputs.
Question: Yes. So as I understand the totality of your evidence on that
topic, you accept that there was a collision. But in terms
positioning of the bikes before that, you can't really call it either way?---I
wouldn't be able to call it either way.
Professor Anderson
was unable to say if there was any other 'steering input' or anything else in
response to the interaction between
the wheels of the
motorcycles.
Professor Anderson
concluded that Mr Nurse's Honda was 'probably not upright' at the point at
which it collided with the guardrail
conclusion was not challenged at trial.
motorcycles had capsized before sliding towards the
conclusion was not challenged at trial.
Professor Anderson
said that it is not necessarily the case that the collision would have been the
thing that set the trajectories of the motorcycles into the
Professor Anderson's
evidence was that the trajectories of the motorcycles, assuming there was
interaction between the two motorcycles
and each hitting the guardrail, was
'unlikely to be
opinion was not challenged at trial.
his opinion it would not be uncommon if there was some sort of 'light'
interaction that there would be some attempt at regaining
control before the
motorcycles
opinion was not challenged at trial.
Professor Anderson's evidence was that 'these bikes are also in the midst
of a cornering manoeuvre' and so 'an application
of the brake can cause a bike
to stand up and run
opinion was not challenged at trial.
terms of the interaction or collision between the two motorcycles,
Professor Anderson's evidence was that the
possibilities
are that it
was a significant collision, or it may have just been a destabilising
interaction.
Professor Anderson's
evidence was that there are a number of things that can happen between what
caused the initial destabilisation
and when the motorcycles began hitting the
road before sliding into the
opinion was not challenged at trial.
Professor Anderson
was unable to say whether the physical interaction between the two motorcycles
had to have been from the right-hand
side of the Yamaha into the left-hand side
of the Honda ('Hypothesis One, Mr Donaldson') or from the left-hand side of
into the right-hand side of the Honda ('Hypothesis Two,
Mr Nurse'). He could not say either
ANALYSIS REGARDING SPEED
10.1 The speed limit
was no evidence led at trial as to what the speed limit was for that stretch of
road along Alexander Drive on the approach
to the bend. However, there was some
evidence in the form of the Serious Crash Form prepared by police that the
speed limit was
60 km per hour.
was no issue taken at trial with the accuracy of that notation which appears
from its face to have been prepared by an officer
from the Traffic Enforcement
Group North and by the attending police officer Chantal Bell from Morley Police
was no indication on any of the scene photographs or photographs of the approach
to the bend as to the speed limit on that
Specifically, and importantly, there was no speed sign indicating that the speed
limit on the approach to the bend was a speed
60 km per hour.
the absence of any evidence to the contrary I take that the speed limit on the
approach to the bend was 60 km per hour.
10.2 The pleaded position and the way the trial was conducted on speed
Parties pleaded that the other was negligent in driving at a speed that was
' in all the
circumstances.
There was no further particularisation as to what either Party meant by
'excessive' speed. I approach this matter on the basis
that 'excessive in the
circumstances' is a reference to a speed above the speed limit for that stretch
, Professor Anderson in his
in a number of places to speed in general terms. For example, he refers
(a) the extent of the damage to both motorcycle as not being
consistent with an impact at '
(b) the damage to the motorcycles and the roadway evidence is not consistent
with the proposition that the motorcycles were travelling
at high speed
just before the bend in the
(c) the preliminary estimate suggests that the motorcycles were not
travelling '
at high speeds
' just before the
was no evidence led at trial from Professor Anderson as to what he meant by
'excessive' or 'high' speed/s and he was not asked
in his evidence to clarify
these more general remarks nor to distil what he meant by those references into
a speed in kilometres
per hour, or a general range of speed in
kilometres per hour.
some assistance is gained by the context in which some of these more general
references to speed were made in Professor
Anderson's report.
Professor Anderson
in the context of the reference to 'high-speed crashes' referred to the throw
distances of riders from the point
of collision. Professor Anderson gave
his opinion that a rider ejected from his motorcycle at
115 km per hour might easily slide
He concluded that the rest positions of the riders were clearly at odds
with that, finding that both riders were thrown
collision'.
take from the totality of Professor Anderson's evidence and an examination
of, particularly, Photograph
'collision' in this context Professor Anderson was referring to the point
of impact (with the barrier) as opposed to the
collision as I have defined
it to mean (the collision between the two motorcycles).
the context in which Professor Anderson refers to speed in this regard I
take his references to 'excessive speed' or 'high speed'
as being speeds up
to 115 km per hour.
is not possible to refine this further on the evidence led at trial, however it
is not necessary to do so given that the way in
which the trial was conducted on
the issue of speed was an acceptance of Professor Anderson's evidence and
his conclusions which
I now analyse.
10.3 The maximum cornering speed
turn firstly to Professor Anderson's opinion that if Mr Donaldson was
travelling in the left lane, 84 km per hour is likely to
represent the
maximum speed at which the corner could be negotiated without a high risk of
have found that Mr Donaldson was travelling in the left lane on the
approach to the bend, consistent with the trajectory he drew
Mr Donaldson's
drawing of his line of travel on Exhibit 2 was not put to
Professor Anderson for his opinion on whether Mr Donaldson's
was close to 86 m or something less. That would have been helpful.
However, having regard to the two radii drawn by Professor
Anderson in
Photograph 9,
it appears that Mr Donaldson's trajectory was closer to 86 m than
97 m, probably less than 86 m.
that analysis I conclude that the maximum speed at which Mr Donaldson could
negotiate the corner without a high risk of losing
control was 84
km per hour, likely less if Mr Donaldson's line of travel was in
fact a radius of less than 86 m.
the evidence at trial was that Mr Donaldson did lose control of his
motorcycle, for the reasons that follow, I find that his
loss of control was not
as a result of him travelling at 'high speed', or a speed of, or close
to, 84 km per hour.
10.4 The likely speed of the Parties
Professor Anderson
concluded that the 'pre-crash' speed of the Honda was
60 km per hour. That speed was after any braking before
motorcycle began to
skid/slide.
take from Professor Anderson's evidence in this regard that 'pre-crash'
must be a reference to pre-collision (as opposed to pre-impact
barrier), because his evidence was that following the collision (between the
motorcycles) they capsized and slid into the
barrier. There was therefore no
braking after the point of collision and before the impact with the
Professor Anderson
stated in respect of Mr Donaldson, that it is not likely that his
hit the barrier
at a speed that exceeded
60 km per hour.
Professor Anderson then says this:
Again, this speed is
before any braking before the barrier impact
period of braking is assumed then it is plausible that Mr Donaldson's speed
was 70 kph, as he indicated on his claim form.
Respectfully,
this aspect of Professor Anderson's evidence is not entirely easy to
Professor Anderson's report notes that that speed is
braking before the barrier impact, that reference to the speed being before any
braking must be an error. That is for two reasons.
Firstly, the context
of that sentence refers back to Professor Anderson's conclusions in respect
of the Honda's speed in the preceding
reference to '
' is a reference back to his conclusion about the
Honda's speed
any braking before the motorcycle began to slide. A
plain reading of the reference to 'again' therefore refers back to the Honda's
calculated speed
any braking.
Professor Anderson's conclusion in respect of the Yamaha's speed only makes
sense if it is a
post-braking
speed when the next sentence is
considered.
Professor Anderson goes on to conclude that if a period of braking
is assumed, 'then it is plausible that Mr Donaldson's speed
was 70 km per hour as he indicated on his claim
sentence only makes sense if his earlier opinion that it was not likely that the
Yamaha hit the barrier at a speed that exceeded
60 km per hour
was in fact after any braking.
as noted earlier in these reasons, it may come down, respectfully, to lack of
distinction between the phraseology of what
is meant by 'the impact,' whether
that refers only to the impact with the barrier, which is how I have defined
'impact' to mean,
or whether it also refers on occasion to the impact between
the two motorcycles, which I have referred to as 'the collision'.
it does not matter because the import of Professor Anderson's evidence is
that it is unlikely that Mr Donaldson was travelling
in excess of 60
km per hour and that it was
(only) that he was
travelling at 70 km per hour if a period of braking is assumed.
have not been able to make a finding either that Mr Donaldson did or did
not brake prior to the collision. There is no evidential
basis, therefore, for
me to find that Mr Donaldson did in fact brake, which would place his speed
at 70 km per hour.
Ultimately,
I rely on Professor Anderson's concluded speed in respect of
Mr Donaldson that his motorcycle did not hit the barrier
at a speed that
60 km per hour.
respect of Mr Nurse, consistent with Professor Anderson's evidence I
find that his pre-crash speed was 60 km per hour after any
braking before the Honda began to
respect of Mr Nurse I have made a finding, consistent with his evidence,
that he did brake entering the bend before the collision
Mr Donaldson's motorcycle. That would place his pre-collision speed
therefore in excess of 60 km per hour.
is not possible for me to determine how many kilometres per hour in excess of
60 km per hour Mr Nurse was travelling prior to
collision with Mr Donaldson's motorcycle.
Professor Anderson
opined that it was possible for a skilled rider who straightened the curve
increasing the radius to 98 m could
negotiate the bend at a speed of up to
105 km per hour. Mr Nurse was a skilled rider with many years of
experience riding motorcycles
of different types. Examining Photograph
radius of 97 m as depicted on that photograph, that appears broadly
consistent with the line of travel taken by Mr Nurse
consistent with
Mr Donaldson's oral evidence and Exhibit 2.
are a number of pieces of evidence before the court that might in combination
suggest a higher speed for Mr Nurse. They include
the following
pieces of evidence.
that Mr Nurse was an experienced motorcycle rider. Secondly,
Professor Anderson's evidence that a skilled rider could negotiate
at up to 105 km per hour without losing control if he straightened the
curve and increased the radius to 98 m. Thirdly,
Mr Donaldson's
oral evidence and Exhibit 2 suggests that Mr Nurse overtook
Mr Donaldson and fourthly that he did so moving from Mr
Donaldson's
right to left in a more straight-on approach to the bend.
having overtaken Mr Donaldson Mr Nurse must have then been travelling
at a speed greater than Mr Donaldson. I have accepted
Professor Anderson's opinion that it was not likely that Mr Donaldson
hit the barrier at a speed that exceeded 60 km per hour. Next,
have made a finding consistent with Mr Nurse's own evidence that he braked
prior to impact which on Professor Anderson's evidence
would place his
speed in excess of 60 km per hour.
Notwithstanding
what that combination of evidence suggests, I am unable to make a
finding that Mr Nurse's speed as he entered the
bend before the collision
with Mr Donaldson was significantly greater than
60 km per hour.
is because firstly Professor Anderson was not asked in his evidence to give
an opinion as to how many kilometres per hour in
excess of 60
km per hour Mr Nurse was likely to have been travelling after
braking. I am no expert in crash reconstruction and neither
am I in a position
to determine the likely speed of a motorcycle.
Professor Anderson concluded that the damage to the roadway evidence is not
consistent with the proposition that the motorcycles
were travelling 'at high
speed' just before the bend in the road. Whilst the evidence does not preclude
that possibility, there
is no physical evidence to that effect.
notwithstanding that each man pleaded speed as a particular of negligence in his
case against the other, the way the trial
was conducted on speed was an
acceptance of Professor Anderson's conclusions in respect of speed.
is, of course, well-established that a case may be litigated at trial in a
manner that is materially different from the issues
as defined by the pleadings.
Where this is alleged to have occurred, the actual conduct of the proceedings
must be examined to ascertain
whether a point was or was not taken at trial.
For this purpose, no narrow or technical view should be
case was not conducted in fact on the basis that either Party was travelling at
'excessive' speed. It would not be fair to either
Party to approach the issue
of speed in a way which is inconsistent with the way in which the trial was
conducted on this issue.
conducting the case in a way that accepted Professor Anderson's conclusions
on speed, speed has been removed as a particular of
negligence pressed by either
that end I adopt the unchallenged conclusions of Professor Anderson on the
likely speed at which each Party was travelling.
summarising my findings of fact from Professor Anderson's evidence as a
whole, it is necessary to address some of the other
materials before
Professor Anderson, and before the court, referencing
10.5 Other materials referencing speed - Mr Donaldson
were other materials before Professor Anderson to which he refers in his
report that reference speed. Those materials comprised:
letter of instruction to Professor Anderson from Mr Donaldson's
solicitors dated 28 July
states that 'Mr Donaldson claims that he was travelling at approximately
60 to 80 km/hr prior to entering the bend'; and
(ii) That aspect of Professor Anderson's
he opines that: 'If a period of braking prior to impact is assumed, then it is
plausible that Mr Donaldson's speed was 70
km per hour
he indicated on his claim
respect of (ii) I have given my reasons earlier as to why I do not find that
Mr Donaldson was travelling at 70 km per hour, but
necessary to add the following observations in respect of both items
(i) and (ii). Both materials can broadly be categorised
as amounting to
out of court admissions against interest by Mr Donaldson.
with the way in which the trial was conducted in respect of speed, there was no
direct evidence given by Mr Donaldson
cross-examined on his speed neither was he cross-examined on any of out of court
made to his solicitors or statements made on his Claim Form that he
was travelling above the speed limit.
that end Mr Donaldson was not given the opportunity of confirming that he
made any of the post-accident statements regarding speed.
Neither was he given
the opportunity of adopting as correct any notation or reference to speed in the
materials outlined.
that end, it would be unfair for me to decide the case or make findings of fact
that are material in each man's action against
the other on a basis other than
that on which the trial was
to the materials above, in respect of (i), Mr Donaldson was not
cross-examined that he had told his solicitors that he had
been travelling at
between 60 km - 80 km per hour prior to entering
Professor Anderson's
conclusion that it was not likely in his opinion that Mr Donaldson hit
the barrier at a speed that exceeded
60 km per hour was not challenged
at trial. Whilst Professor Anderson's evidence as to whether that was
a speed pre or post-braking
is unclear, that does not matter given that I have
been unable to make a finding that Mr Donaldson did (or did not)
evidence therefore is that Mr Donaldson was not travelling in excess of
60 km per hour.
Professor Anderson's
opinion in this regard was reached having regard to the totality of the
materials before him from comprising
the physical evidence from the crash site
as well as any instructions to him on speed. Professor Anderson's
conclusions are not
consistent with Mr Donaldson travelling in excess of
60 km per hour prior to the collision.
therefore do not place any weight on any references to speed in the Letter of
Instruction.
respect of (ii) Professor Anderson's opinion that if a period of braking
prior to impact is
Mr Donaldson's speed was 70 km per hour, 'as he indicated on
his claim form'
there are two things to say. Firstly, Professor Anderson is asked to
provide his opinion on information provided to him by Mr Donaldson
form of his Crash Form. That form was not in evidence in this trial.
consistent with the way in which the trial was conducted on speed,
Mr Donaldson was not examined or cross-examined on whether
that statement
in the Crash Form was accurate and truthful.
the extent that it comprised a prior consistent statement it would be
inadmissible. To the extent that it comprised a prior inconsistent
that would go to Mr Donaldson's credit, there was no evidence elicited
from Mr Donaldson either in his evidence-in-chief
nor in cross-examination
from Mr Donaldson that would provide
a foundation to give rise to the
statements on the Crash Form being cross-examined as prior inconsistent
statements.
the extent that the statements on the Crash Form about speed were admissions
against interest, there was no cross-examination
to that effect. Any statements
in the Crash Form formed no part of the evidence in this trial.
Professor Anderson
was not giving his opinion that Mr Donaldson was in fact travelling at
70 km per hour. He was asked to provide
his opinion on whether
any statement about a speed of 70 km per hour was
Professor Anderson answered that question on the premise
that there was an act of braking by Mr Donaldson before impact.
was no evidence at trial that Mr Donaldson did brake. His evidence
was that he was unsure if he did brake. For the reasons
I have given
earlier I am unable to make a finding either way as to whether Mr Donaldson
did, or did not, brake when Mr Nurse cut
across his line of travel.
so far as Professor Anderson stated in his report that it is
that Mr Donaldson was travelling at a speed of
70 km per hour, it appears that he was being asked whether
70 km per hour was possible,
or plausible in the context of the
physical evidence that was before Professor Anderson.
the extent that Professor Anderson concluded that it was
that Mr Donaldson was travelling at 70 km per hour that was
not in fact his concluded opinion on Mr Donaldson's speed.
Professor Anderson's
concluded opinion on Mr Donaldson's pre-collision speed was that it was
less than 60
km per hour.
Professor Anderson
was not examined nor cross-examined in a manner that was inconsistent with both
Parties accepting Professor Anderson's
concluded opinion that the Yamaha
was not travelling in excess of 60 km per hour.
Professor Anderson's
opinion that it was not likely that the Yamaha hit the barrier at over
60 km per hour is reliable evidence that
was not challenged at
trial. I therefore accept it.
follows that I place no weight on the opinion that it is
Mr Donaldson was travelling at
70 km per hour.
10.6 Other evidence referencing speed - Mr Nurse
are a number of hospital notes and other medical records for Mr Nurse in
particular which reference high or excessive speed
being involved.
records can be summarised as:
(a) The St John Ambulance Patient Care
(b) The Royal Perth Hospital records (the RPH records) comprising:
(i) Royal Perth Hospital Emergency Department Trauma
(ii) Royal Perth Hospital Inpatient Case
(iii) Royal Perth Hospital Trauma Tertiary
(iv) Royal Perth Hospital Discharge
(c) The Letter from Dr Goodheart dated 14 December
is necessary to briefly address my approach to those materials.
to (a), the SJA Patient Care record for Mr Nurse, it contains a
reference to: '
second pt reported travelling approx. 150 km
reference to 'second pt' appears to relate to Mr Donaldson given that this
was the SJA Patient Care record for Mr Nurse. I do
on this reference to speed as being accurate nor reliable for a combination of
the following three reasons.
it is a hearsay recording of a remark attributable to 'second pt.' The author
of that note was not called to give evidence
to confirm who 'second pt' refers
to. Even accepting that this was a reference to Mr Donaldson, there was no
witness called to speak
to the circumstances in which that reference to speed
was made, whether it was made directly by the 'second pt' (Mr Donaldson) to
the author of the note or whether that reference came from another source.
there was no cross-examination of Mr Donaldson that that reference to speed
was something he told the St John Ambulance
officer, nor whether, if it was
said, it was accurate.
the reference to speed in that note is not specific as to whether it relates to
the approach to the bend or some other point
along Alexander Drive.
Parties conducted the trial on the basis that the acts of driving said to be
negligent occurred on the approach to the bend as
manner in which the driving of each man falls to be assessed, therefore,
consistent with the way in which the trial was
conducted, as being along the
stretch of road that I would estimate to be between 20 m to approximately
40 m, north of the Thongsbridge
Street intersection.
trial was not conducted on any reliance by either Party on any evidence of
excessive speed prior to the approach to the bend
as a basis for inferring
excessive (or any particular) speed on the approach to the bend.
that reference to speed is inconsistent with the unchallenged evidence of
Professor Anderson that the damage to the motorcycles
and the roadway
evidence was not consistent with the proposition that the motorcycles were
travelling at high speed just before the
bend in the road.
therefore do not place any weight on this reference to speed.
turn to address the medical records in (b), the RPH records for Mr Nurse.
It is not necessary to list all of the references in
those notes to speed. It
suffices for me to say that I place no weight on any of those references to
speed for a combination of
all of the following.
none of the authors of the notes were called to give evidence. I cannot be
satisfied that any of the references to actual
speed or references to 'high
speed' were things that Mr Nurse told medical staff directly, or whether
those references to speed came
from the authors of the various notes referring
to, and adopting as accurate, earlier references in the notes to speed.
any references to speed were likely taken in the context of assessing, and
treating the injuries suffered by Mr Nurse.
The history taken of the
accident was likely to assist in an understanding of how the patient came to be
injured as opposed to any
focus on the precise details of the events leading to
the collision.
whilst Mr Nurse was cross-examined extensively about the RPH records, the
Dr Goodheart letter and the Dr De Felice letter,
those areas of
cross-examination were targeted at two issues. The first was the
recorded statements made by Mr Nurse about whether
he had consumed heroin
prior to the collision. The second was the recorded statements made by
Mr Nurse about his recollection of
the events of the collision.
was no substantive cross-examination of Mr Nurse about his speed. To that
end Mr Nurse was not given an opportunity to confirm
or deny whether he had
many any of the recorded statements about speed and, if he had, whether those
statements were an honest, accurate
and reliable account of his speed.
as noted earlier, notwithstanding that both Parties pleaded excessive speed as a
particular of the negligence alleged against
the other, the trial was conducted
in such a way that the evidence of Professor Anderson regarding the likely
speed each man was
travelling prior to the collision was not challenged.
Party was cross-examined either at all, or to any real extent, about riding at
any particular speed on the approach to the
bend, or as at the point of
collision between the two motorcycles.
was there any cross-examination of either Party about riding at an 'excessive'
or 'high speed' prior to the approach to the
bend with a view to seeking an
inference to be drawn about the speed of either Party on the approach to the
way in which the trial was conducted was an acceptance of the conclusions
reached by Professor Anderson as to the respective
speeds of each
motorcycle prior to the collision. The references in the medical notes to speed
were therefore largely, if not completely,
ignored at trial.
the adopted position of the Parties about speed, and an (obvious) decision by
the Parties not to examine or cross-examine about
speed, I do not place any
reliance on any of the references to speed in the RPH records.
respect of (c), the cross-examination of Mr Nurse about the content of
Dr Goodheart's letter to Mr Nurse's solicitor was focused
Mr Nurse told Dr Goodheart about his recollection or memory of the
accident, as opposed to any real focus on the issue of
speed. Again, given
the way the Parties conducted the trial in respect of the issue of speed, I put
aside any reference to speed
in the letter from
Dr Goodheart.
10.7 Other physical evidence suggestive of speed
final piece of evidence to deal with that raises the issue of speed was the
digital speedometer reading of the Yamaha of 115
km per hour
after the collision. This is referred to in Professor Anderson's report.
I do not accept that as a reliable record
of the pre-crash speed of the Yamaha.
That is for the following four reasons.
that reading appears to have come from a report from an attending fire service
officer. That report was not in evidence
in this trial. Neither was the author
of that report called to give evidence at trial as to the circumstances in which
that reading
was made, or any evidence about the Yamaha which might impact on
the reliability of that reading.
I accept Professor Anderson's opinion that it is unclear how the
speedometer would have been frozen if the engine was still
running and power was
supplied to the cluster when the fire officer turned the motorcycle off.
Professor Anderson's opinion was that there are four criteria that need to
be met before a frozen digital speedometer reading
can be considered to be
(a) that there needs to be a determination of the type of
sensor and processor used to display the reading;
(b) an obvious cause of power loss should be identified and that loss of
power should have been instantaneous;
(c) a determination needs to be made as to whether either wheel had lost
the loss of power. If
the wheel that was being monitored for speed loss has lost control with the road
surface, that may lead to
an unreliable result; and
(d) finally, and most importantly, the reading should be used only if
consistent with other physical evidence.
Professor Anderson
concluded that those criteria were not met in this case. He opines that the
frozen speedometer is unreliable
in the absence of further information on its
design and/or without further testing.
and importantly, Professor Anderson states that the alleged reading is not
consistent with the physical evidence for the
speed of the motorcycles at the
moment of collision with the
therefore disregard the frozen speedometer as providing any reliable evidence
10.8 What was a reasonable speed for a rider to have navigated the approach to
was no evidence led at trial that 60 km per hour was an excessive
speed at which to travel on the approach to the bend.
was no evidence led at trial that 60 km per hour was not a speed
at which a reasonable person paying proper regard for his
or her safety and the
safety of fellow road users would travel on the approach to the bend.
Party ultimately sought to argue that travelling at a speed of
60 km per hour was not a reasonable speed at which to travel
the approach to the bend.
therefore approach the issue of speed on the basis that a reasonable person
taking reasonable care for their own safety, and the
safety of other
road users, would travel on the approach to the bend at a speed not in excess of
60 km per hour.
10.9 Conclusions on speed
light of the analysis above, the issue of speed comes down to
Professor Anderson's conclusions which I distil as follows.
physical evidence from the scene (the damage to the motorcycles and the roadway
evidence) was not consistent with the motorcycles
travelling 'at high speed just
before the bend in the
maximum speed at which the bend could be negotiated was
84 km per hour.
was not likely that Mr Donaldson's motorcycle hit the barrier at a speed
that exceeded 60 km per hour.
pre-collision speed of Mr Nurse's motorcycle after any braking before the
motorcycle began to skid or slide was
60 km per hour.
ANALYSIS ON THE MECHANICS OF THE CRASH
11.1 Mr Nurse's argument that Hypothesis One is excluded by the physical
undertake an analysis on the mechanics of the collision in light of the
challenge to Mr Donaldson's evidence that the collision
occurred as he
described it, namely that the right side of his front wheel impacted with the
inner, left side of Mr Nurse's rear
wheel (Hypothesis One).
challenge by Mr Nurse was two-fold. Firstly, that if Mr Donaldson's
account of the collision was correct, as a matter of basic
physics that would
have forced Mr Nurse's motorcycle to the right, leading to Mr Nurse's
motorcycle travelling in a trajectory similar
to Mr Donaldson's
other words, the trajectory taken by Mr Nurse's Honda in impacting the
barrier at F1 on Photograph 5 is inconsistent with the
'cause and effect', or
the mechanics, of being hit to the inside left of his rear wheel.
and following on from the above, that the square-on or frontal impact of
Mr Nurse's motorcycle with the barrier at F1 is
consistent (only) with
Mr Donaldson's motorcycle hitting Mr Nurse's motorcycle from
Mr Nurse's right (Hypothesis Two).
11.2 The relevant findings of fact
analysing the mechanics of the collision, the following findings of fact are
(i) Prior to the collision Mr Nurse braked;
(ii) That he did so having overtaken Mr Donaldson from his
(iii) Mr Donaldson had committed to riding the bend at the point at
which Mr Nurse overtook him and cut across his line of travel,
a matter of seconds prior to the two motorcycles
(iv) Immediately prior to the collision, both men were in the midst of a
cornering manoeuvre;
(v) After colliding the motorcycles destabilised;
(vi) Both motorcycles capsized;
(vii) Both motorcycles had gone at least part of the way around the bend in
the road at the point at which they had capsized;
(viii) Both motorcycles then slid towards the
(ix) The motorcycles impacted with the barrier at F1 (the Honda) and F2 (the
Yamaha) respectively on Photograph 5; and
(x) Professor Anderson's opinion that the trajectory between the point
of collision of the motorcycles and the points of impact between
the barrier was
'unlikely to have been linear'.
11.3 Analysis
those facts together, it is not a linear equation from the point of collision
between the motorcycles and the points of impact
with the barrier. There is a
sequence of at least five events: the point of collision; the point of
destabilisation, the point of
capsizing, the point of sliding along the road and
the point at which each motorcycle impacted with the barrier.
Professor Anderson's evidence there are two (possible) further aspects to
the equation between the point of collision and the
point of impact with the
barrier, both of which come under the umbrella of 'steering
first possible steering input was Professor Anderson's evidence that both
motorcycles were in the middle of a cornering
they collided.
second possible steering input is the effect of an application of the brakes
whilst the motorcycles were in the midst of a cornering
found that Mr Nurse braked after overtaking Mr Donaldson's motorcycle
that leaves open the possibility of a steering input
arising from
Mr Nurse's application of the brakes whilst cornering.
was not asked in his evidence whether his admitted act of braking caused his
motorcycle to 'stand up' and/or 'run wide'.
To that extent there was
no evidence at trial as to whether that did, or did not, occur. It is not
excluded on the evidence, but
it is not a finding that I am able to make on the
balance of probabilities.
Ultimately,
I am not able to make a finding on the evidence led at trial as to what effect
Mr Nurse's application of the brakes had
on his motorcycle whilst he was
have not been able to make a finding either way as to whether Mr Donaldson
did or did not, apply the brakes when Mr Nurse cut across
his line of
aside any effect that Mr Nurse's act of braking had on his motorcycle
shortly prior to the collision, but taking into account
that both motorcycles
were then engaged in a cornering manoeuvre, and consistent with
Professor Anderson's opinion, I am satisfied
that the trajectory between
the point of collision between the two motorcycles and the impact with the
barrier was not linear.
Professor Anderson's evidence was that he was
unable to say (from the physical evidence) what the precise position was of each
immediately prior to the
Professor Anderson
agreed that it was
that if Mr Nurse was struck to the
left-hand side that his motorcycle would then be forced to the right and end up
in a position like
Mr Donaldson. Professor Anderson said that that
possibility
was not excluded by the evidence, but he did not put it as
high as being more probable than
Professor Anderson can properly be asked whether the front-on damage to the
Honda at F1, and the final resting position of
the Honda, was inconsistent with
the crash occurring in the way Mr Donaldson described (Hypothesis One),
Professor Anderson did not
accept that proposition as being probable.
it is for the court to make a finding factually on the evidence led at trial
that it concludes was honest, accurate and
reliable as to how the collision
between the two motorcycles occurred.
have accepted Mr Donaldson's evidence of the collision, and I am
satisfied of that account on the balance of probabilities.
have rejected Mr Nurse's evidence of the collision as being wholly
reconstructed.
follows from this is that in his claim against Mr Nurse, Mr Donaldson
has satisfied me on the balance of probabilities that
the collision occurred as
he described.
Professor Anderson's
evidence on whether the physical evidence from the crash site supports or
excludes Mr Donaldson's account of
the mechanism of the crash, or
Hypothesis One, does not reach the threshold at which that finding is
reached that conclusion, I note the following. Ultimately, in my opinion,
nothing turns on the precise mechanics of the collision,
Mr Donaldson's front wheel collided with Mr Nurse's rear wheel front
on, from Mr Nurse's inner left-hand side or from Mr
Nurse's outer
right-hand side.
am of that opinion because however the two motorcycles collided, I am
satisfied on the balance of probabilities that the collision
was the result of
Mr Nurse overtaking, and then cutting across, Mr Donaldson's line of
travel from Mr Donaldson's right-hand side
with no warning and insufficient
distance to reasonably enable Mr Donaldson to then avoid colliding with
Mr Nurse's motorcycle.
ILLICIT DRUGS
12.1 The factual position
is not controversial that after the accident both Mr Donaldson and
Mr Nurse returned positive readings to methylamphetamine and
amphetamine.
Mr Donaldson's
blood reading was positive to methylamphetamine (0.24 mg/L) and to
amphetamine (0.06
no certificate of analysis for Mr Donaldson's blood results was tendered
into evidence, as a matter of fact those results
were not disputed at
blood reading was positive to methylamphetamine (0.1 mg/L) and to
amphetamine (0.02 mg/L). A certificate of analysis
was tendered into evidence
in respect of those
noted earlier, both men were subsequently charged with driving with a prescribed
illicit drug in their system and both men were
convicted of that
12.2 The pleaded position of the Parties
Mr Donaldson's
case against Mr Nurse included as a pleaded particular of negligence that
Mr Nurse 'drove while intoxicated as that
term is defined within
Civil Liability Act 2002
(WA)' (CLA) and drove
while under the influence of heroin and/or other illicit
case prior to trial did not include as a pleaded particular of negligence that
Mr Donaldson drove while intoxicated as
that term is defined within CLA
nor that he drove while under the influence of illicit drugs including
methylamphetamine and amphetamine.
filed an amended defence dated 19 September 2024. In those pleadings,
and in an application brought on the morning of the
trial, Mr Nurse applied
for leave to amend his Defence and his Statement of Claim to include as
particulars of negligence that Mr
(a) drove under
the influence of illicit drugs including methylamphetamine and
amphetamine;
(b) drove whilst intoxicated by substances listed in par 4(f) as that
term is defined in
application brought by Mr Nurse on the first morning of trial to amend his
pleadings was opposed by Mr Donaldson.
have two functions. First, to ensure a fair trial by putting the other Party on
notice of the case to be met. Secondly,
to define the issues for decision
so that the court can control the preparation of the case and the conduct of the
hearing Mr Nurse's application, it was confirmed that neither Party would
be calling expert evidence at trial from, for example,
a toxicologist or
other suitably qualified person about the effect of the illicit substances on
either man's capacity to exercise
reasonable care and skill.
indicated to counsel my preliminary view that I would require expert evidence to
establish any causal link between the illicit
drugs in each man's system and any
subsequent impairment on his capacity to exercise reasonable care and
do not consider that a finding about the effect of varying levels of
methylamphetamine and amphetamine on a person's ability to
safely ride a
motorcycle is within my personal experience nor is it a matter of common
experience.
indicated to counsel that in the absence of expert evidence, (and absent
any admission by either Party) I did not consider that
I would be able to
draw an inference against either man that his capacity to exercise reasonable
care and skill in riding his motorcycle
impaired by reason of
the illicit drugs alone.
was no application by either Party to adjourn the trial to enable expert
toxicology evidence to be brought. In the absence
of such evidence (and absent
an admission by either man that he was in fact impaired by reason of the illicit
drugs) I indicated
to the Parties that my approach would be to treat the issue
of the positive blood readings for illicit drugs for both Mr Donaldson
Mr Nurse as being questions of fact only.
for Mr Nurse then withdrew the application to amend Mr Nurse's
pleadings in respect of the illicit drugs particulars. The
illicit drugs
particulars remained a pleaded part of Mr Donaldson's case against
Mr Nurse. I deal with that later in these reasons:
see [14.3].
SUMMARY OF THE KEY FINDINGS OF FACT
13.1 Summary of key findings of fact
Mr Donaldson
was travelling in the left lane of Alexander Drive heading south approaching the
Mr Donaldson
was not travelling in tandem, or together, with Mr Nurse at the
Mr Donaldson was approximately
30 m from the guardrail, somewhere along
the 10-m stretch of black line on Photograph
Mr Nurse overtook Mr Donaldson from Mr Donaldson's right-hand
did so without any warning to Mr Donaldson that he was coming, nor that he
intended to overtake Mr Donaldson.
then cut across Mr Donaldson's line of travel.
overtaken Mr Donaldson, Mr Nurse's motorcycle was then in the
left-hand lane.
or immediately after, Mr Nurse cut across Mr Donaldson's path,
Mr Nurse was slowing down and braking.
the point at which Mr Nurse overtook Mr Donaldson, Mr Donaldson
had then committed to riding the bend.
cut across Mr Donaldson's line of travel at such proximity to
Mr Donaldson's motorcycle that Mr Donaldson had no reasonable
space to avoid the front wheel of his motorcycle colliding with the rear wheel
of Mr Nurse's motorcycle.
cut across Mr Donaldson's line of travel in circumstances where, by reason
of the bend in the road, the kerb and the impending
guardrail, Mr Donaldson
had no reasonable alternative route to avoid the collision between the two
motorcycles. Mr Donaldson was
'boxed in'.
right-hand side of Mr Donaldson's front wheel made contact with the
left-hand side of Mr Nurse's rear wheel.
am satisfied on the balance of probabilities that the collision between the two
motorcycles occurred because of the manner in which
Mr Nurse overtook, and
cut across, Mr Donaldson's path of travel in the circumstances
13.2 Summary of key findings of fact from Professor Anderson's evidence
13.2.1 General
area of road on Alexander Drive where the two motorcycles collided was somewhere
along a 10-m stretch of road as depicted by
the black line in Photograph
(the point of
collision).
places the point of collision at a point between approximately
27 m north-east of the point of impact with the barrier.
is the point at which the motorcycles likely became destabilised before
motorcycles capsized before sliding towards the
two motorcycles had gone at least part of the way around the bend in the road at
the point at which they had capsized and were
sliding toward the
motorcycles were in the left lane at the point of
13.2.2 The Honda
areas of damage to the barrier are highlighted in yellow on Photographs 10 and
on the road surface likely to have come from the
Honda impacted with the barrier at the area circled in yellow on the left in
Photograph 11, immediately above the white painted
line on Thongsbridge
corresponds with F1 in Photograph 5 which is where Mr Nurse's motorcycle
impacted with the
damage at this part of the barrier is the heaviest and is associated with the
debris from the
debris on the road around the Thongsbridge Street intersection leading to the
resting place of Mr Nurse's Honda came from the
pre-collision marks on the roadway just north of Thongsbridge Road leading
towards areas of damage to the barrier as shown on
consistent with a motorcycle in the process of
That corresponds with F1 on Photograph 5, the point of impact of
Mr Nurse's Honda.
motorcycle that made these marks, the Honda, was not likely upright when it hit
Honda slid approximately 7 m before striking the barrier and slid for a
further 9 m after the
Honda sustained more damage than Mr Donaldson's motorcycle and included
components around the handlebar being broken
consistent with a heavy frontal or 'square on' impact at F1 as depicted on
damage at F1 was heavier than the impact at F2, the point of impact of the
13.2.3 The Yamaha
Yamaha impacted with the barrier at the area circled in yellow on the right in
Photograph 11. This corresponds with F2 on Photograph
5 marking the point
of impact of Mr Donaldson's motorcycle with the
Yamaha ended up 15 m from the point of impact with the barrier.
Mr Donaldson's
motorcycle (the Yamaha) sustained damage to the right-side faring, consistent
with an impact to the side or underside
of the motorcycle. The rider's seat was
dislodged but the motorcycle was otherwise relatively free of collision damage:
impact of the Yamaha with the barrier at F2 on Photograph 5 was a 'more glancing
the impact made by the Honda with the barrier.
13.2.4 Speed
maximum speed that a 'normal rider' could take the bend especially whilst
braking would be 84 km per hour for a normal riding
travelling in the left lane approaching the bend) with a radius of
a skilled rider who straightened the bend to a radius of approximately 98 m
a speed of up to 105 km per hour might be
achievable.
as I do from Mr Donaldson's evidence that he was travelling in the left
lane on the approach to the bend, 84 km per hour
represents the
maximum speed at which the corner could be navigated without a high risk of
motorcycle was travelling at 'high speeds' just before the bend.
physical evidence at the scene from the damage to the motorcycles and the
roadway evidence is not consistent with the proposition
that the motorcycles
were travelling at 'high speed' just before the bend in the road.
infer that the reference to 'high speed' is a reference to speed well in excess
of 60 km per hour. It is not possible to be more
precise than
this on the evidence led at trial.
pre-crash speed of the Honda was
60 km per hour.
last memory, which I accept, was of braking into the corner. I conclude from
that evidence that Mr Nurse braked prior
to the collision between the two
motorcycles.
those circumstances the pre-collision speed of the Honda was
60 km per hour after any braking before the motorcycle began to
is not possible for me to determine on the evidence led at trial the speed of
the Honda prior to braking.
was not likely that the Yamaha hit the barrier at a speed that exceeded
60 km per hour.
that I have been unable to make a finding as to whether Mr Donaldson braked
prior to colliding with Mr Nurse's motorcycle,
I conclude that the
Yamaha was not travelling in excess of 60 km per hour on the
approach to the bend.
13.2.5 The mechanics of the collision
motorcycles were in the middle of a cornering manoeuvre when they
result of the collision between the two motorcycles was likely to have
destabilised them.
am not able to make a finding as to whether either man attempted to regain
control following the impact. There was no evidence
motorcycle capsized.
is not possible to say precisely how long after the point of impact and
destabilisation that each motorcycle capsized. It was
likely to have been about
a third of a second after being destabilised to capsize onto the
motorcycle then slid into the barrier.
trajectory of the Honda between the point of collision with the Yamaha and the
point of impact with the barrier was unlikely
to have been
Professor Anderson
was unable to say either way what the position of the two motorcycles was
immediately prior to the
Professor Anderson
concluded that Mr Nurse's version of events (Hypothesis Two) was
but he would not go so far as to say that it was
Professor Anderson
was therefore not able to give a concluded opinion on the mechanics of the
collision. That is entirely reasonable
given that he was not a witness to the
have found on the balance of probabilities that the collision occurred as
Mr Donaldson described in his evidence (Hypothesis One).
have rejected Mr Nurse's account (Hypothesis Two).
conclude consistent with Professor Anderson's evidence that the physical
evidence from the crash scene does not exclude the mechanics
of the collision
occurring consistent with Mr Donaldson's account (Hypothesis
MR DONALDSON'S CLAIM - CIV 385 OF 2022 - ANALYSIS OF THE
14.1 Particulars (i), (ii) and (iii): The overtaking
am satisfied on the balance of probabilities that Mr Nurse overtook
Mr Donaldson's motorcycle when it was unsafe to
that Mr Nurse travelled across Mr Donaldson's line of
Mr Nurse overtook too closely to Mr Donaldson's motorcycle which,
in all the circumstances, impacted Mr Donaldson's ability
his motorcycle
to avoid colliding with Mr Nurse's
motorcycle.
Particulars
(i), (ii) and (iii) have been made out.
14.2 Particular (iv): Changing of lanes when unsafe
take from pleaded particular (iv) that this is a reference to Mr Nurse
moving from the right lane of the dual carriageway into
the left lane.
is some evidence at trial that Mr Nurse changed lanes from the right lane
of the dual carriageway into the left lane where
the point of collision
occurred. Mr Donaldson's evidence in marking Mr Nurse's line of
travel towards the bend places Mr Nurse moving
from the right lane into the
left lane where it is common ground that the collision occurred.
I cannot reach a concluded view on this because Mr Donaldson's markings
drawn from the witness box were not an exercise
in precision in terms of which
lane both riders were in when Mr Nurse cut across Mr Donaldson's line
my view it does not matter whether Mr Nurse physically changed lanes from
the right-hand lane of Alexander Drive to the left-hand
lane immediately prior
to the collision or whether he moved across Mr Donaldson's line of travel
from the outer right-hand aspect
of the left lane, towards the kerb. That is
because I am satisfied that Mr Nurse cut across Mr Donaldson's line of
travel when it
was not safe to do so. This is encapsulated in particulars
(i), (ii) and (iii) above.
(iv) is not established.
14.3 Particular (v): 'Intoxication' and Particular (vi): 'under the
(v) pleads that Mr Nurse drove while intoxicated as that term is defined
of the CLA; particular (vi) that Mr Nurse drove while
under the influence of heroin and/other illicit drugs.
is not clear from the pleadings whether particular (vi) is to be assessed
differently to particular (v). That is, does 'under
the influence' mean
something different to 'intoxicated'?
language of CLA
refers to 'intoxicated' and defines it to
affected by alcohol or a drug or other substance capable of intoxicating a
person to such an extent that the person's capacity to
exercise reasonable care
and skill is impaired.
of the CLA 'to such an extent that' have work to do. The
definition of 'intoxicated' demands a causal link between the substance
impairment to the person's capacity to exercise reasonable care and skill. In
reaching that conclusion I give the language
of the section its plain and
ordinary meaning.
does not provide an automatic presumption that any amount of drug or
substance capable of intoxicating a person would amount to 'intoxication'
the purposes of the section.
'intoxicated' were a reference to any positive reading (at all) to alcohol (or a
drug or other substance capable of intoxicating
a person) the legislative
provision would be so worded.
outlined earlier in these
was no evidence led at trial that Mr Nurse rode with heroin in his system.
To the extent that Mr Donaldson's case includes
that Mr Nurse was
intoxicated with heroin at the time of the accident, I dismiss it.
respect of Mr Donaldson's pleaded case that Mr Nurse drove whilst
'intoxicated' by methylamphetamine and amphetamine, there was
no evidence that
the amounts of those drugs in his system were such as to impair his capacity to
exercise reasonable care and skill.
Mr Nurse in cross-examination
denied that he was in any way impaired by reason of the illicit substances in
the circumstances I do not consider that an inference can be drawn from the fact
alone that Mr Nurse drove with methylamphetamine
and amphetamine in his blood
that he was in fact intoxicated as that is defined to mean in CLA
turn to consider whether the fact that Mr Nurse was subsequently charged
and convicted of driving with a prescribed illicit drug
is relevant to my
assessment of whether particulars (v) and (vi) are made out.
was convicted of an offence contrary to
Road Traffic
That section
provides that:
A person who drives or attempts to drive a motor
vehicle while a prescribed illicit drug is present in the person's oral fluid or
blood commits an offence.
methylamphetamine and amphetamine are a 'drug' for the purpose of the RTA being
drugs to which the
Misuse of Drugs Act 1981
note that Mr Nurse was not charged (and convicted) of the alternative
offence available under RTA s 63(1)(b) which provides the
driving a motor vehicle 'while under the influence of drugs to such an extent as
to be incapable of having proper control
of the vehicle'.
note further that Mr Nurse was not charged (and convicted) of the
alternative offence available under RTA s 64AB(1) which provides
an offence to drive while impaired by drugs.
proving that offence, the onus is on the State to prove beyond reasonable doubt
that the accused drove a motor vehicle with one
or more drugs at the time in
circumstances where the conduct, condition or appearance of the accused at, or
after the time of, that
driving was consistent with a person who has consumed or
used that drug or drugs. Further, that the conduct or condition associated
a person who has consumed or used that drug would be inconsistent with a person
being capable of having proper control of a
language of the statutory provisions of RTA s 63(1)(b) and s 64AB(1)
and s 64AB(5) demand a causal connection between the drugs
and an effect on
the person ('under the influence of'). Further, a causal connection of
being under the influence of that drug
to such an extent
(my emphasis) so
as to be incapable of having proper control of the vehicle or so as to be
inconsistent with a person having proper
control of a motor vehicle.
RTA s 63(1)(b) and s 64AB(1) and s 64AB(5) are framed differently
to the definition of 'intoxicated' in CLA s 5L(4), there
is similarity of
the import of the language between those provisions in demanding a causal link
between the drugs and an alteration
of the person's normal state so as to be
'affected' by the drug.
was not charged with an offence contrary to either of those two provisions of
RTA creates offences of driving with any blood alcohol content for certain
drivers, and other offences that increase in their
seriousness in accordance
with higher blood alcohol contents. Those offences range from driving
while having any blood alcohol content
(RTA s 64AAA(1)); to
0.02 g of alcohol per 100 ml of blood (RTA s 64A(4)); to
0.05 g of alcohol per 100 ml of blood (RTA s 64AA(1));
of, or above, 0.08 g of alcohol per 100 ml of blood to over
0.13 g of alcohol per 100 ml of blood (RTA s 64(1) and
penalties that apply increase in seriousness the higher the blood alcohol
content reflecting, undoubtedly, that the higher the
blood alcohol content, the
greater the effect of the alcohol on a person's ability to have proper control
of a motor vehicle.
gradation of seriousness for driving with higher blood alcohol contents might
provide a useful guide or at least a starting point,
together with other
objective evidence, to gauge the extent to which a person was affected by
alcohol to then examine and determine
any causative nexus with their ability to
properly control a motor vehicle.
is no such gradation of seriousness for driving with a prescribed illicit
undertaken that analysis, I am therefore unable to draw an inference from the
charge (and conviction) alone of an offence
contrary to RTA s 64AC(1) that
Mr Nurse was affected by the methamphetamine and/or amphetamine to such an
extent that his capacity
to exercise reasonable care and skill was
was no other evidence led at trial from which such an inference could properly
was open to Mr Donaldson to call expert toxicology evidence about the
effect of the levels of methylamphetamine and amphetamine
in Mr Nurse's
system on his capacity to exercise reasonable care and skill. There was no such
evidence. Neither was there, in respect
of Mr Nurse, any admission by him
that he was riding whilst intoxicated as defined in CLA s 5L.
driving with the presence of methylamphetamine and amphetamine in a driver's
blood plainly has the potential to impair a person's
capacity to exercise
reasonable care and skill, it does not follow automatically that a person was in
fact so impaired.
Mr Donaldson
has not satisfied me on the balance of probabilities that Mr Nurse drove
whilst intoxicated. Particular (v) is not
respect of particular (vi), it is not clear whether the pleaded position that
Mr Nurse drove 'whilst under the influence' of heroin/and
or other illicit
drugs differs from particular (v), driving 'whilst intoxicated.'
Consistent with my findings of fact in so far
as particular (vi) is pleaded in
respect of heroin, that particular is not made out.
so far as it concerns other illicit drugs, I note that 'under the influence' is
not the language of CLA
To the extent that it has the same meaning
as 'intoxicated,' as defined in the CLA s 5L, I reach the same
conclusions as I have
in respect of particular (v). It is not
established on the evidence.
the extent that it means something different to 'intoxicated' as defined in the
CLA s 5L, as a matter of logic there is still
a required nexus between the
level of the drug/s in a person's system and an effect on them (as opposed to
having no effect) and
the further threshold that the effect was to such an
extent that it impaired the person's capacity to exercise reasonable care and
was the case for particular (v) there was no expert evidence led in respect of
particular (vi) to prove that Mr Nurse was, at
the time of the collision,
under the influence of the illicit drugs in his blood. Mr Nurse made no
admissions to that effect in
his cross-examination.
was no evidence led at trial as to Mr Nurse's objective conduct or
behaviour to enable me to draw the inference that he was
in fact 'under the
influence' of any drug at the time he drove his motorcycle.
would be circular, and erroneous, reasoning to conclude from the fact of the
collision that Mr Nurse must have been under the
influence of the drugs in
his system at the time.
only evidence which had the potential of suggesting that Mr Nurse might
have been under the influence of some substance was the
Mr Donaldson took of Mr Nurse lying on the ground of the Dianella
Plaza car park. However that photograph does not assist
analysis. On Mr Donaldson's evidence the photograph was taken before
Mr Nurse was given the drugs by Mr Donaldson.
that extent logically it cannot prove by inference that
Mr Nurse was then behaving in a manner consistent with someone who was
the influence of some illicit substance. On the evidence that I have
accepted, that photograph was taken whilst Mr Nurse was waiting
Mr Donaldson to supply him with the illicit drugs.
photograph therefore at its highest simply shows Mr Nurse lying on the
concrete floor. It does not go any way to proving that
Mr Nurse was then
under the influence of an illicit drug.
the absence of evidence proving the required causal link from an expert witness
or an admission by Mr Nurse to that effect, particular
(vi) is not made
14.4 Particular (vii): Speed
the reasons given in
notwithstanding that speed was a pleaded particular
of Mr Donaldson's case against Mr Nurse, the trial was conducted on
that speed fell away as a live issue.
therefore find that particular (vii) is not made out.
14.5 Particular (viii): Failing to keep a proper lookout and
Particular (ix): Failing to pay due care and attention
is convenient to deal with particulars (viii) and (ix) together. Particular
(viii) pleads that Mr Nurse failed to keep any, or
any proper, lookout.
Particular (ix) pleads that Mr Nurse failed to pay due care and attention
whilst riding his motorcycle and
to take heed of the bend in the road. That
latter aspect of particular (ix) is in effect part of Mr Donaldson's case
that on the
approach to the bend, Mr Nurse failed to pay due care and
my view, particular (viii) is encapsulated in particular (ix).
with my findings of fact, I am satisfied on the balance of probabilities that
Mr Nurse did brake when he cut across Mr
Donaldson's line of travel on
the approach to the bend.
circumstances of Mr Nurse braking and slowing down having cut across
Mr Donaldson's line of travel, made the manner in which
Mr Nurse rode
his motorcycle dangerous for Mr Donaldson. That is because
Mr Nurse's act of braking having cut in front of Mr Donaldson's
of travel bridged the gap between the two motorcycles and gave Mr Donaldson
less time to react to try and avoid the collision.
danger of riding in this way was heightened by reason of it occurring on the
approach to the bend, leaving Mr Donaldson insufficient
time and space to
then avoid colliding with Mr Nurse.
light of my findings of fact I am satisfied on the balance of probabilities that
Mr Nurse failed to keep any, or any proper, lookout
and that he failed to
pay due care and attention whilst riding his motorcycle on the approach to the
(ix) is established.
the extent that it is necessary to find, particular (viii) is
established.
14.6 Particulars (x) and (xi): Failing to take positive action to avoid the
deal with particulars (x) and (xi) together.
(x) pleads that Mr Nurse 'failed to brake, swerve, steer, manoeuvre and/or
otherwise ride his motorcycle in manner to
avoid the accident'. Particular (xi)
pleads that Mr Nurse 'failed to adequately control his motorcycle so as to
avoid the accident'.
though particulars (x) and (xi) are couched in the negative, in my view it
was the positive conduct of Mr Nurse in steering
or manoeuvring his
motorcycle to cut across Mr Donaldson's line of travel in close proximity
to Mr Donaldson's motorcycle together
with his act of braking at that
geographical location, on the approach to the bend, that caused the collision
between the two motorcycles.
is an element of hindsight in the way in which particulars (x) and (xi) are
am to assess (on Mr Donaldson's case against Mr Nurse) what the
reasonable response would have been, or what precautions a reasonable
Mr Nurse's position would have taken, before the harm occurred: see
The court must look forward to identify what a reasonable person in
Mr Nurse's position would have done, not backward to identify
would have avoided injury to Mr Donaldson.
my view particulars (x) and (xi) fall foul of demanding a retrospective
assessment of what a reasonable motorcyclist in Mr Nurse's
position, ought
to have done, taking reasonable care for his safety and that of other road
users, from the standpoint of avoiding
the accident that followed. That is not
the approach required by law.
do not address particulars (x) and (xi) further in those circumstances.
light of my findings that particulars (i), (ii) (iii) (viii) and (ix) and are
made out, Mr Donaldson has established that Mr Nurse
motorcycle in a manner that was negligent.
DETERMINATION OF LIABILITY CIV 385 OF 2022
15.1 Principles of law - Duty of care and breach
principles governing a claim in negligence between two motorcycles are governed
by a combination of common law and the CLA
is well established that motorists, including those riding motorcycles, owe
other road users a duty to take reasonable care to
avoid reasonably foreseeable
risks of harm.
to when a breach of this duty of care arises, CLA
does not modify or supplant common law principles which determine whether a duty
of care exists or
(1) A person is not liable for harm caused by that person's fault in
failing to take precautions against a risk of harm
(a) the risk was foreseeable (that is,
it is a risk of which the person knew or ought to have known); and
(b) the risk was not insignificant; and
(c) in the circumstances, a reasonable person in the person's position would
have taken those precautions.
(2) In determining whether a reasonable person would have taken precautions
against a risk of harm, the court is to consider the
following (amongst other
relevant things) -
(a) the probability that the
harm would occur if care were not taken;
(b) the likely seriousness of the harm;
(c) the burden of taking precautions to avoid the risk of harm;
(d) the social utility of the activity that creates the risk of harm.
term 'harm' is defined in
of the CLA to mean 'harm of any kind,
including', relevantly, personal injury which includes impairment of a person's
physical or
mental condition.
specifies the preconditions for establishing a breach of
Specifically, CLA
does not provide that a person is liable for harm
caused by that person's fault in failing to take precautions against a risk of
harm. Rather, it modifies the common law as to breach of duty of care by, among
other provisions, articulating situations in which
a person is not liable for
phrase 'in failing to take precautions against a risk of harm' refers to 'a
failure by the person in question to take positive
action against the
possibility of the occurrence of harm of any kind including personal injury,
damage to property and economic
proper assessment of the alleged breach of duty depends on the correct
identification of the relevant risk of harm because it
is only then that an
assessment can take place of its foreseeability, and the appropriate
response of the reasonable person to that
The enquiry is concerned with determining what person, thing or set of
circumstances gave rise to the potential for the harm for
which the plaintiff
seeks damages.
The characterisation of the relevant risk should not obscure the true source of
the potential
requires that the risk of harm was foreseeable. That is, it is a risk
of which the person knew or ought to have known. That is
not a statement of the
probability or improbability of the occurrence of the harm but means that the
risk of harm is not one that
is far-fetched or
is not necessary that the precise chain of events that have led to the harm be
foreseeable. A risk of damage that is not far-fetched
or fanciful in the sense
that the probability of the damage occurring is extremely unlikely, may
nevertheless be a foreseeable
The common law test is
undemanding.
The answer to this question involves a factual judgment turning on the
facts of the case as they are proved in
Section 5B(1)(b)
requires that the relevant 'risk of harm' be 'not insignificant'. That
requirement in
imposes a more demanding standard than the common
law test of foreseeability, but not by very
sets out a number of factors which the court is to consider in
determining whether, for the purposes of
a reasonable person
would have taken precautions against the relevant risk of harm.
factors include, amongst other relevant things, the probability that the
harm would occur if care were not taken
(s 5B(2)(a))
, the likely
seriousness of the harm
(s 5B(2)(b))
, the burden of taking precautions to
avoid the risk of harm
(s 5B(2)(c))
and the social utility of the activity
that creates the risk of harm
(s 5B(2)(d)).
makes plain that each of the four sub-paragraphs of
(amongst other relevant things) must be
considered.
This subsection restates the common law position as set out in
Wyong Shire Council v
requires identification of what precautions a reasonable person in the
position of the defendant would have taken by way of response
to a foreseeable,
not insignificant, risk. This is to be determined
objectively.
that judgment must be made after the event, it must seek to identify what the
reasonable response would have been by a person
looking forward at the prospect
of the risk of
The precautions which a reasonable person would have taken are to be
assessed before the harm occurred,
prospectively, and not with the wisdom of
response to a foreseeable risk is to be judged by the criterion of
reasonableness, not some more stringent requirement of
prevention'.
The court must therefore look forward to identify what a reasonable person
in the defendant's position would have done, not backward
to identify what
would have avoided the injury to the
undertaking the inquiry in CLA
, and in addressing the
non-exhaustive list of factors that must be taken into account in determining
whether or not a reasonable
person would have taken the relevant precautions
against the risk of harm, the court is not enquiring as to the particular way in
which the accident that occurred has come about. The precision of investigation
into what happened to the plaintiff must not be
permitted to obscure the nature
of the assessment in respect of whether there was a breach of the duty of care
which was the cause
of the plaintiff's injuries.
details as to
the accident occurred and how the plaintiff came to be
injured may be of particular importance to a consideration of contributory
negligence, but not to an examination as to whether there was a breach of a duty
of care which was a cause of the plaintiff's
15.2 Analysis - Mr Donaldson's action against Mr Nurse CIV 385 of
Mr Donaldson's action against Mr Nurse, the relevant risk of harm for
the purposes of CLA
is the risk of personal injury to persons in the
position of Mr Donaldson as a fellow user of the road.
risk of personal injury to a fellow road user by Mr Nurse failing to take
reasonable care in the manner in which he rode his
motorcycle is a risk that was
foreseeable. It is a risk of which Mr Nurse knew or ought to have known.
is established.
risk of personal injury to a fellow road user, particularly a fellow
motorcyclist, is a risk of harm that is not insignificant.
It is not contentious that driving in an unsafe manner creates a
risk of harm (personal injury) to other road users that is plainly
insignificant. CLA
is established.
determining whether a reasonable person would have taken precautions against a
risk of harm (personal injury to Mr Donaldson as
a fellow road
probability that the harm would occur if care were not taken is high, if not
very high. The probability of harm to a motorcyclist
coming off his or her
motorcycle in the course of a collision or in taking evasive action to avoid
colliding with another motorcyclist
is very high: (CLA
s 5B(2)(a)).
likely seriousness of the personal injury to a motorcyclist by another
motorcyclist failing to take the precautions against that
risk of harm is very
s 5B(2)(b)).
than wearing a helmet, there is no protection for a motorcyclist who comes off
his motorcycle, either as a result of a collision
with another motorcyclist, or
as a result of the motorcycle becoming destabilised in seeking to avoid
colliding with another motorcycle.
The risk of very serious injuries to such a
motorcyclist is plainly very high.
precautions to avoid the risk of harm are easily identifiable and include any,
or all, of the following:
(a) Ensuring a safe distance was
maintained at all times between Mr Nurse's motorcycle and
Mr Donaldson's motorcycle; and/or
(b) Ensuring that Mr Nurse did not overtake Mr Donaldson's
motorcycle such that it then brought Mr Nurse's motorcycle directly in
front of Mr Donaldson's motorcycle; and/or
(c) Ensuring that Mr Nurse only overtook, or passed, Mr Donaldson's
motorcycle on a stretch of road that enabled him to remain at
a safe distance
from other users of the road; and/or
(d) Further, and specifically, in not overtaking Mr Donaldson at that
geographical location, namely on the approach to the bend; and/or
(e) Further, and specifically, travelling and remaining in the right lane of
the dual carriageway until it was safe to move into the
burden of Mr Nurse taking precautions to avoid the risk of harm is nil:
s5B(2)(c)).
the social utility of the activity that creates the risk of harm, when 'the
activity' that creates the risk of harm is
identified broadly in terms of riding
a motorcycle, there is a social utility generally in riding a motorcycle as a
mode of transport:
if the proper formulation of the activity that created the risk of harm is
specified to be the manner in which Mr Nurse
rode his motorcycle on the
approach to the bend (overtaking Mr Donaldson, overtaking Mr Donaldson
at a geographical location which
did not permit Mr Donaldson the
opportunity of taking evasive action, overtaking Mr Donaldson such that
there was insufficient distance,
and time, to enable Mr Donaldson to
avoid colliding with Mr Nurse's motorcycle) plainly there is no social
utility of that activity.
When the activity that creates the risk of
harm is narrowed in that
there is no social utility of that activity.
conclude on that analysis that in the circumstances, a reasonable person in
Mr Nurse's position would have taken any of the precautions
identified.
is established.
if I am to assess the social utility of the activity that creates the risk of
harm in the broader sense, concluding that there
is social utility in riding
motorcycles, having regard to
of the factors in CLA
I would also conclude that a reasonable person in Mr Nurse's position would
have taken any of the precautions I have identified.
is established on this analysis.
conclusion, I am satisfied on the balance of probabilities that Mr Nurse
breached the duty of care he owed to Mr Donaldson as
a fellow road
15.3 Principles of law - Contributory negligence
turn to consider the question of whether Mr Donaldson was contributorily
principles governing contributory negligence are set out in CLA s 5K which
(1) The principles that are applicable in determining whether a person is liable
for harm caused by the fault of the person also
apply in determining whether the
person who suffered harm has been contributorily negligent in failing to take
precautions against
the risk of that harm.
(2) For that purpose -
(a) the standard of care
required of the person who suffered harm is that of a reasonable person in the
position of that person; and
(b) the matter is to be determined on the basis of what that person knew or
ought to have known at the time.
'applicable principles' referred to in CLA s 5K(1) are those found in CLA
virtue of CLA s 5K the same standard of care applies to the liability of a
defendant in negligence and to a defence that a plaintiff
contributorily
Thus the standard of care is the same for contributory negligence as for
making of a finding of contributory negligence involves a comparison of
both the culpability, that is, of the degree of departure
from the standard of
care of the reasonable person, and the relevant importance of the acts in
causing the damage, of the Parties.
It is the 'whole conduct' of each
Party in relation to the circumstances of the accident which must be subjected
to comparative
examination.
making of a finding of contributory negligence turns on a factual investigation
of whether the plaintiff contributed to his or
her own loss by failing to take
reasonable care of his person.
is reasonable care depends on the circumstances of the case. In many cases, it
may be proper for a plaintiff to rely on the
defendant to perform its duty,
however there is no absolute rule. The duties and responsibilities of the
defendant are a variable
factor in determining whether contributory negligence
exists and, if so, to what
plaintiff will be guilty of contributory negligence if he ought reasonably to
have foreseen that if he did not act as a reasonable
and prudent person he would
expose himself to risk of
the purpose of determining the appropriate standard the court must treat the
person who has suffered harm as a reasonable person
in the position of that
person and the matter is to be determined on the basis of what that person knew
or ought to have known at
onus is on the defendant to prove contributory negligence.
In Mr Donaldson's claim against Mr Nurse, the onus is on
to prove on the balance of probabilities that Mr Donaldson
was contributorily negligent.
15.4 Analysis
apply the standard of care of the plaintiff Mr Donaldson as being that of a
reasonable person in his position: (CLA s 5K(2)(a)).
I consider what
Mr Donaldson knew, or ought to have known, at the relevant time, which I
assess to be when riding along Alexander
Drive southbound on the approach to the
bend: (CLA s 5K(2)(b)).
further apply the principles in CLA
to the actions of
Mr Donaldson and to the actions of a reasonable person in
Mr Donaldson's position. Mr Donaldson is not liable
for harm, here
not contributorily negligent, caused by his fault in failing to take precautions
against the risk of personal injury
(the relevant risk of harm) unless the risk
of that harm was foreseeable, that is, a risk of which Mr Donaldson knew or
have known, and it was a risk that was not insignificant. Further,
that in the circumstances, a reasonable person in Mr Donaldson's
position would have taken those precautions.
the present case, there is no issue that the risk of harm to Mr Donaldson
in a collision with another motorcyclist was foreseeable
and not insignificant.
There was a high probability of a very serious injury occurring if care were not
taken. In that context,
the critical question in assessing contributory
negligence is what precautions a reasonable person in the position of
Mr Donaldson
would have taken, which he failed to take.
need to refer to three issues in assessing Mr Nurse's claim that
Mr Donaldson was contributorily negligent. Firstly, the issue
illicit drugs in Mr Donaldson's blood. Secondly, the issue of speed,
and thirdly, the issue of Mr Donaldson's manner of driving
the collision.
15.4.1 The illicit drugs
respect of the first issue, as noted earlier in these reasons, Mr Nurse did
not plead his case on the basis that Mr Donaldson
was negligent or
contributorily negligent by reason of having illicit drugs in his system.
Further, (or as a result), the trial
on behalf of Mr Nurse was not
subsequently conducted on the basis that Mr Donaldson was contributorily
negligent by reason of the
illicit drugs in his system.
It is necessary, however, to make the following observations.
it cuts across the grain of reasonableness for a motorcyclist to ride his
motorcycle with an illicit drug in his system.
A reasonable person paying
proper regard for his own safety, and the safety of their fellow road users,
would not ride his motorcycle
with the presence of a prescribed illicit drug in
his system.
I must bring the analysis back to the test in CLA
Mr Donaldson is not (contributorily) liable for harm
caused by that
person's fault,
(emphasis added) that is, by Mr Donaldson's fault,
in failing to take precautions (failing to ensure that he did not ride his
with the presence of illicit drugs in his system) against the risk of
personal injury.
am not to assume a causal nexus between an action (riding with a prescribed
illicit drug), or inaction (a failure to ensure that
he did not ride with a
prescribed illicit drug), and a subsequent event (a collision)
and subsequent harm (personal injury). There
must be evidence from which I
can properly make such a finding.
stated earlier in these reasons, there was no evidence led at trial as to any
nexus between the illicit drugs in Mr Donladson's
system and any subsequent
impairment to his capacity to rise his motorcycle safely.
was no evidence led at trial that the illicit drugs played any role in the
manner in which Mr Donaldson subsequently rode his
motorcycle. There was
no evidence that the illicit drugs in fact impaired Mr Donaldson's capacity
to ride his motorcycle safely,
or were likely to impair a person in
Mr Donaldson's position to ride his motorcycle safely.
have concluded in the absence of any such evidence that I am not persuaded on
the balance of probabilities that the presence of
illicit drugs in
Mr Donaldson's system was in any way causative of the collision between the
two motorcycles.
the analysis back to the test in
, there is no evidence that
Mr Donaldson's injuries (the harm) were caused by his fault in failing to
take precautions against a risk
of personal injury in ensuring that he did not
ride with a prescribed illicit drug in his system.
was clearly a risky thing for Mr Donaldson to have ridden his motorcycle in
circumstances where he had illicit drugs in his system.
However, in the absence
of any evidence that Mr Donaldson's manner of driving was impaired or
affected by those illicit drugs, Mr
Nurse has not established on the
balance of probabilities that the presence of the illicit drugs in fact had any
effect on Mr Donaldson's
capacity to exercise reasonable care and skill in
the riding of his motorcycle safely.
the test in CLA
is applied, Mr Nurse has failed to establish
on the balance of probabilities that Mr Donaldson was contributorily
negligent by failing
to take the precaution of not riding with an illicit drug
in his system.
issue falls away.
15.4.2 Excessive speed
turn to address the issue of Mr Donaldson's speed. Mr Nurse pleads
that Mr Donaldson was negligent (or contributorily negligent)
in riding at a speed that was excessive in the
circumstances.
have found that Mr Donaldson was travelling at a likely speed of
60 km per hour on the approach to the bend. Consistent with the
way in which the trial was conducted, speed was not a factor pressed in this
trial. The expert evidence did not support a finding
that prior to colliding
with Mr Nurse's motorcycle, Mr Donaldson was then travelling at a
speed in excess of 60 km per hour.
assessing whether Mr Donaldson was contributorily negligent by travelling
at a speed that was excessive in the circumstances,
Mr Nurse has failed to
establish that travelling at a speed of 60 km per hour was not a
reasonable speed at which to travel, including
on the approach to the bend.
That was the speed limit on the approach to the bend. There was no evidence led
at trial that travelling
at 60 km per hour was an unsafe speed at
which to travel on the approach to the bend.
is no evidence from which I can infer that Mr Donaldson's speed was in any
way causative of the collision. This issue falls
15.4.3 Mr Donaldson's manner of driving on the approach to the bend
turn to the third issue, which I refer to broadly as the manner of
Mr Donaldson's driving on the approach to the bend.
pleaded position of Mr Nurse is that Mr Donaldson was negligent (or
contributorily negligent) in failing to adequately or at
all keep any or any
proper lookout; in failing to ride with any or any proper control; in permitting
his front wheel to impact the
rear wheel of Mr Nurse's motorcycle; in
failing to adequately or at all brake in time to avoid the collision and in
failing to adequately
or at all steer or control his motorcycle so as to avoid
with my findings of fact Mr Nurse has not established on the balance of
probabilities that any aspect to Mr Donaldson's
driving was inconsistent
with the actions of a reasonable motorcycle rider paying due care and attention
for his safety and for the
safety of his fellow road users.
with my findings of fact Mr Nurse has not established on the balance of
probabilities that he and Mr Donaldson were travelling
southbound together,
such that Mr Donaldson reasonably ought to have known or anticipated that
Mr Nurse might overtake him or ride
his motorcycle within close proximity
to Mr Donaldson's motorcycle on the approach to the bend.
with those findings of fact, Mr Donaldson did not then assume a risk of
riding with someone who he knew had just consumed
an illicit drug.
the framework of contributory negligence, Mr Nurse has not established that
a reasonable person in Mr Donaldson's position paying
due care and
attention for his own safety would not in those circumstances get on his
motorcycle and travel.
with those findings, Mr Donaldson was entitled to ride his motorcycle on
the approach to the bend facing forward in the
direction of his travel.
Reasonableness
required Mr Donaldson to pay due care and attention to where he was going,
and to the circumstances around him. I
am satisfied that he did that.
Reasonableness
on the approach to the bend required Mr Donaldson to take heed of the bend
in the road, the arrow sign and guardrail.
I am satisfied that he did
Reasonableness
did not require Mr Donaldson to look behind him to see if anyone was then
travelling close to him. To do so on the
approach to the bend would not, in my
view, be a reasonable step for Mr Donaldson to take, exercising due care
and attention to his
own safety.
am satisfied on the balance of probabilities that the collision between the two
motorcycles was solely due to the manner in which
Mr Nurse rode his
motorcycle on the approach to the bend.
Specifically,
that Mr Nurse
overtook Mr Donaldson from
his right, that he did so without warning with the effect that Mr Nurse
left insufficient distance between
his rear wheel and Mr Donaldson's front
wheel to avoid the two motorcycles colliding. Further, that Mr Nurse
braked as he passed
across Mr Donaldson's line of travel on the approach to
the bend. The combination of Mr Nurse then travelling directly in front
Mr Donaldson's line of travel, with the geographical layout of the approach
to the bend, left Mr Donaldson hemmed in, with no
reasonable opportunity to
take evasive action to avoid his motorcycle colliding with Mr Nurse's
motorcycle.
the language of CLA
, Mr Nurse has failed to establish that
Mr Donaldson is liable for harm caused by Mr Donaldson's fault in
failing to take precautions
against a risk of that harm (personal injury) in any
of the ways pleaded in Mr Nurse's Defence as
follows that Mr Nurse has failed to establish that Mr Donaldson was
contributorily negligent.
15.5 Principles of Law - Causation
provides that a determination that the fault of a person
(the tortfeasor) caused particular harm comprises two elements.
that the fault was a necessary condition of the occurrence of the
harm (factual causation) and secondly, that it is appropriate for
the scope of
the tortfeasor's liability to extend to the harm so caused (scope of
liability).
common law of negligence requires determination of causation for the purposes of
attributing legal responsibility and that determination
inevitably involves two
questions. Firstly, a question of historical fact as to how particular harm
occurred and second a normative
question as to whether legal responsibility for
that particular harm occurring in that way should be attributed to a particular
two questions, one factual and one normative, are reflected in the two distinct
elements of causation in CLA
determination in accordance with CLA
that negligence was a
necessary condition of the occurrence of harm is nothing more or less than a
determination on the balance of
probabilities that the harm that in fact
occurred would not have occurred absent the
negligence.
onus is on Mr Donaldson in his claim against Mr Nurse to prove on the
balance of probabilities that but for Mr Nurse's negligence,
(personal injury) would not have occurred.
15.6 Analysis
Mr Donaldson
has proved on the balance of probabilities that but for Mr Nurse's manner
of riding his motorcycle on the approach to
the bend, the collision between the
two motorcycles would not have occurred. Specifically, I have found that the
cause of Mr Donaldson's
front wheel impacting with Mr Nurse's rear
wheel was the result of Mr Nurse:
(a) overtaking
Mr Donaldson without warning;
(b) overtaking Mr Donaldson when it was not was safe to do so given the
bend in the road;
(c) overtaking Mr Donaldson such that Mr Nurse was then directly in
front of Mr Donaldson's line of travel; and
(d) overtaking Mr Donaldson such that there was insufficient distance
between the two motorcycles, and insufficient time, to reasonably
Mr Donaldson to take evasive action to avoid his front wheel colliding with
Mr Nurse's rear wheel.
am satisfied that the collision between the two motorcycles was a destabilising
event, causing both men to lose control of their
motorcycles, each capsizing and
then sliding into the barrier with each man dislodged from their motorcycle
sustaining injury.
collision between the two motorcycles was the catalyst for Mr Donaldson's
motorcycle to destabilise and capsize, leading to Mr
Donaldson being thrown
over the barrier and leading to him suffering significant injury.
was no evidence that as an experienced motorcycle rider, absent Mr Nurse's
negligent manner of riding, Mr Donaldson could not
have, and would not
have, safely negotiated the bend in the road travelling as he then was, at the
speed limit or even below the
speed limit. Mr Donaldson had seen the bend
and had committed to riding the bend, when Mr Nurse cut across his line of
am satisfied on the balance of probabilities that absent Mr Nurse's fault,
the collision between the two motorcycles would not
have occurred. The
collision was caused by Mr Nurse's negligent manner of riding his
motorcycle on the approach to the bend.
causation is established.
is no reason why it is not appropriate for the scope of Mr Nurse's
liability to extend to the harm so caused (Mr Donaldson's
15.7 Conclusion CIV 385 of 2022
conclusion Mr Donaldson has established that Mr Nurse breached the
duty of care that he owed to Mr Donaldson and that the breach
collision between the two motorcycles and the resultant injuries to
Mr Donaldson.
has failed to establish on the balance of probabilities that Mr Donaldson
was contributorily negligent.
MR NURSE'S CLAIM - CIV 1904 OF 2022 - ANALYSIS OF THE PLEADINGS
turn now to consider Mr Nurse's claim against
Mr Donaldson.
16.1 Particular (a) Failed to adequately or at all keep any or any proper
with my findings of fact in
, Mr Donaldson was not travelling
together with Mr Nurse on the approach to the bend, or at all.
Mr Donaldson
was travelling within the speed limit, there was not much traffic on the road
and Mr Donaldson was travelling on the
approach to the bend not reasonably
expecting or anticipating that Mr Nurse would then approach, and then
overtake, him.
Mr Donaldson
was paying due care and attention, or keeping a proper lookout, on the approach
to the bend, noting the bend in the
road and committing to riding the bend.
with my findings of fact Mr Nurse overtook Mr Donaldson suddenly and
without warning and then cut across Mr Donaldson's
line of travel on the
approach to the bend.
is no evidence that Mr Donaldson was not keeping any, or any proper,
(a) is not made out.
16.2 Particular (b) Failed to ride with any or any proper control in that he
permitted his front wheel to impact the rear wheel of
(Mr Nurse's)
with my findings of fact in
, the collision between the two
motorcycles occurred as a result of Mr Nurse overtaking Mr Donaldson
on the approach to the bend,
overtaking him without warning, cutting across
Mr Donaldson's line of travel and braking leaving insufficient distance
between the
two motorcycles to reasonably enable Mr Donaldson to avoid his
front wheel from colliding with Mr Nurse's rear wheel.
that Mr Nurse overtook Mr Donaldson at a geographical location on the
road where Mr Donaldson, when unexpectedly confronted
by Mr Nurse's
motorcycle in front of his, was unable to take evasive action to avoid the
Mr Donaldson
could not reasonably in those circumstances avoid his front wheel impacting with
Mr Nurse's rear wheel.
with my findings of fact Mr Donaldson was not speeding, nor is there any
evidence that prior to Mr Nurse overtaking him,
Mr Donaldson was not
riding his motorcycle with proper control.
collision between the two motorcycles was entirely of Mr Nurse's
(b) is not established.
16.3 Particular (c) Rode at a speed which was excessive in the circumstances
with my findings of fact on speed in
, Mr Donaldson was not riding
at a speed in excess of 60 km per hour prior to the
speed limit on the approach to the bend was 60 km per hour.
was no evidence led at trial that a reasonable motorcyclist taking proper care
for his safety and that of fellow road users
would travel at a speed of less
than 60 km per hour.
with the way that the trial was conducted on the issue of speed, particular (c)
was not pressed.
(c) is not established.
16.4 Particular (d) Failed to adequately or at all brake in time to avoid the
with my findings of fact in
and my observations in respect of
Particular (b), Mr Nurse's actions in overtaking Mr Donaldson left
insufficient distance and time
for Mr Donaldson to avoid colliding with
Mr Nurse's motorcycle.
have been unable to make a finding as to whether Mr Donaldson did or did
am satisfied on the balance of probabilities that Mr Donaldson's failure to
brake either adequately or at all, was not the reason
that his front wheel
impacted with Mr Nurse's rear wheel.
noted earlier, the reason Mr Donaldson's front wheel impacted with
Mr Nurse's rear wheel was entirely due to the unsafe manner
Mr Nurse then overtook, and cut across, Mr Donaldson's line of travel
leaving insufficient distance and time to enable Mr
Donaldson to avoid
colliding with Mr Nurse.
(d) is not established.
16.5 Particular (e) Failed to adequately or at all steer to control the vehicle
so as to avoid the collision
refer to my findings above and my reasoning in respect of Particular (b) which
apply to an assessment of Particular (e).
has failed to establish on the balance of probabilities that Mr Donaldson
failed to adequately or at all steer to control
the vehicle. As noted already,
the cause of the collision was entirely due to the unsafe manner in which
Mr Nurse rode his motorcycle
on the approach to the bend as I have
(e) is not established.
DETERMINATION OF LIABILITY CIV 1904 OF 2022
apply the same principles of law in respect of duty of care and breach to
Mr Nurse's claim against Mr Donaldson as I have set out
Mr Nurse's action against Mr Donaldson, the relevant risk of harm for
the purposes of CLA
is the risk of personal injury to persons in the
position of Mr Nurse as a fellow user of the road.
precautions that a reasonable person ('the precautions') would have taken in the
circumstances are easily identifiable. I have
found that Mr Donaldson was
not riding together with, or alongside, Mr Nurse. Further, that
Mr Donaldson did not reasonably expect
or anticipate that Mr Nurse
would approach him (at all), nor that Mr Nurse would overtake him as he did
on the approach to the bend.
those circumstances the precautions that a reasonable person in
Mr Donaldson's position would have taken against a risk of harm
that he ride paying due care and attention to other road users, that he not
exceed the speed limit, that he look ahead
and be cognisant of the bend in the
road and that he not change lanes suddenly or unexpectedly.
the findings of fact I have made in
, I am satisfied
that Mr Donaldson did all of those things. The manner in which
Mr Donaldson rode his motorcycle was consistent with
a reasonable person in
his position exercising due care for his safety and those around him.
addressing the criteria in CLA
Mr Nurse has not established on
the balance of probabilities that Mr Donaldson breached the duty of care he
owed Mr Nurse.
claim against Mr Donaldson fails.
CONCLUSIONS AND FINAL ORDERS
Mr Donaldson's
claim against Mr Nurse succeeds (CIV 385 of 2022).
claim against Mr Donaldson fails (CIV 1904 of 2022).
matter can be programmed for an assessment of damages.
will hear the Parties as to costs.
Exhibit 10.2
Annotated Photograph 3
ANNEXURE 10
certify that the preceding paragraph(s) comprise the reasons for decision of the
District Court of Western Australia.
22 OCTOBER 2025
Donaldson v Nurse
CIV 385 of 2022; Nurse v Donaldson CIV 1904 of
4, par 6.1.
Annexure 1, Exhibit 10.1 and Exhibit
1, Book of documents, page 74; Photograph 2, Book of documents, page 202;
Annexure 2.
also Photograph 3, Annexure 3, Exhibit 4, Figure
provided on Photograph 3, Annexure 3, Exhibit 4, Figure
Mr Donaldson's Statement of Claim CIV 385 of 2022 filed 29 April 2024, par
Mr Nurse's Statement of Claim CIV 1904 of 2022 filed 2 June 2022, par
3, Annexure 3, Exhibit 4, Figure 12, par 10.3, ts
on Photograph 3, Annexure
Annotated Photograph 3, Annexure
Annotated Photograph 3, Annexure
Annotated Photograph 3, Annexure 3; ts
4, Annexure 4, Exhibit 4, Figure
5, Annexure 5, Exhibit 4, Figure 11.
Photograph 5,
Annexure 5, Exhibit 4, Figure
3, Annexure 3, Exhibit 4, Figure
consistent with Exhibit 4, par
Mr Donaldson's Statement of Claim CIV 385 of 2022 filed 29 April 2024, par
Mr Donaldson's Statement of Claim CIV 385 of 2022 filed 29 April 2024, par
Mr Donaldson's Statement of Claim CIV 385 of 2022 filed 29 April 2024, par
Mr Donaldson's Statement of Claim CIV 385 of 2022 filed 29 April 2024, par
Mr Donaldson's Statement of Claim CIV 385 of 2022 filed 29 April 2024, par
Mr Donaldson's Statement of Claim CIV 385 of 2022 filed 29 April 2024 par
Mr Donaldson's Statement of Claim CIV 385 of 2022 filed 29 April 2024, pars
6(b), 6(c) and
Mr Nurse's Defence CIV 385 of 2022 filed 15 May 2024, par
Mr Nurse's Defence CIV 385 of 2022 filed 15 May 2024, par
Mr Nurse's Defence CIV 385 of 2022 filed 15 May 2024, par
Mr Nurse's Defence CIV 385 of 2022 filed 15 May 2024, par
Mr Nurse's Defence CIV 385 of 2022 filed 15 May 2024, par
Mr Nurse's Defence CIV 385 of 2022 filed 15 May 2024; Mr Nurse's
Amended Statement of Claim CIV 1904 of 2022 filed 6 February
Mr Nurse's Amended Statement of Claim CIV 1904 of 2022 filed 6
February 2024, par
Mr Nurse's Defence CIV 385 of 2022 filed 15 May 2024, par 4;
Mr Nurse's Amended Statement of Claim CIV 1904 of 2022 filed 6 February
2024, par 3.
Mr Nurse's Defence CIV 385 of 2022 filed 15 May 2024, par 4(a);
Mr Nurse's Amended Statement of Claim CIV 1904 of 2022, par
Mr Nurse's Defence CIV 385 of 2022 filed 15 May 2024, par 4(b);
Mr Nurse's Amended Statement of Claim CIV 1904 of 2022 filed 6 February
Mr Nurse's Defence CIV 385 of 2022, filed 15 May 2024, par 4(c);
Mr Nurse's Statement of Claim, CIV 1904 of 2022 filed 2 June 2022,
Mr Nurse's Defence CIV 385 of 2022, filed 15 May 2024, par 4(d);
Mr Nurse's Statement of Claim, CIV 1904 of 2022 filed 2 June 2022,
Mr Nurse's Defence CIV 385 of 2022, filed 15 May 2024, par 4(e);
Mr Nurse's Statement of Claim, CIV 1904 of 2022 filed 2 June 2022,
Mr Nurse's Defence CIV 385 of 2022, filed 15 May 2024, par
Mr Nurse's Defence CIV 385 of 2022, filed 15 May 2024, par 6; referring to
Mr Nurse's Defence CIV 385 of 2022, filed 15 May 2024, par
22; Exhibit
Annexure 6.
particulars (v) and (vi) of Mr Donaldson's claim against Mr Nurse CIV 385 of
Photograph 5, Annexure 5, Exhibit 4, Figure
Photograph 5, Annexure 5, Exhibit 4, Figure
68 - ts 69.
Exhibit 1A.
20, pages 310 - 311. See
24; ts 91 - ts
25, pages 403 -
example Exhibit
King v Nash
[2022] WASC
v Network Ten Pty Ltd (Trial Judgment)
[2024] FCA 369
Kuligowski v Metrobus
[2004] HCA 34
(2004) 220 CLR 363
Kazal v Thunder Studios Inc (California)
Rhesa Shipping Co SA v Edmunds
[1985] 1 WLR 948
, 955 - 956;
Axon v Axon
[1937] HCA 80
(1937) 59 CLR 395
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
[99] and the authorities cited
NOM v Director of Public Prosecutions
[2012] VSCA 198
[124], 655;
Brown v New South Wales Trustee and
[2012] NSWCA 431
See Exhibit 2 and Photograph 9, Annexure 9, Exhibit 4, Figure
Trial Bundle, page 138, Police Running
Annexure 6, Exhibit 2; see
Annexure 6, Exhibit 2; see
4, F1 and F2 on Figure
Exhibit 4, Figure
Photograph 5, Annexure 5, Exhibit 4, Figure
Photograph 5, Annexure 5, Exhibit 4, Figure
Photograph 6, Annexure 7, Exhibit 4, Figure
Mr Donaldson's Statement of Claim CIV 385 of 2022 filed 29 April 2024, par
6(a). Particular (vi), possibly also particular
findings of fact
4, par 2.1.
Exhibit 4, par
Exhibit 4, par 10.3; ts
Photograph, Annexure 3, Exhibit 4, Figure
4, Figure 12, par 10.3; Photograph 3, Annexure
4, Figure 12, par 10.3; ts
Photograph 3 Annexure 3; Exhibit 4, Figure
Exhibit 4, par 11.4; ts
Photograph 4, Annexure 4, Exhibit 4, Figure
Photograph 6, Annexure 7, Exhibit 4, Figure
4, par 6.7.
Photograph 8, Annexure 8, Exhibit 4, Figure
Photograph 7, Annexure 8, Exhibit 4, Figure
Photograph 5, Annexure 5, Exhibit 4, Figure 11, par
Photograph 10, Annexure 10, Exhibit 4, Figure 7 and Photograph 11, Annexure 10,
Exhibit 4, Figure
Photograph 5, Annexure 5, Exhibit 4, Figure
4, Figure 5, par
Photograph 5, Annexure 5, Exhibit 4, Figure
Photograph 5, Annexure 5; Exhibit 4, par
Exhibit 4, par
Exhibit 4, par
Exhibit 4, par
Exhibit 4, par
Exhibit 4, par
4, par 7.7.
Exhibit 4, Figure
Photograph 9, Annexure 9, Exhibit 4, Figure
4, par 7.8.
Exhibit 4, par
Exhibit 4, par
Exhibit 4, par
Exhibit 4, par
Exhibit 4, par
example, Photograph 6, Annexure 7, Exhibit 4, Figure
example Photographs 10 and 11, Annexure
4, Figure 11. Photograph 5, Annexure
4, par 8.5.
Exhibit 4, par
Exhibit 4, par
Exhibit 4, par
Exhibit 4, par
Exhibit 4, par
Exhibit 4, par 11.2; ts
Exhibit 4, par
example Photographs 1 and 2 in
Mr Donaldson's Statement of Claim, CIV 385 of 2022 filed 29 April
2024, par 6(a)(vii); Mr Nurse's Statement of Claim CIV 1904 of
2022 filed 2
June 2024, par
Exhibit 4, par
Exhibit 4, par
Exhibit 4, par
Exhibit 4, pars 8.3.2 and
Exhibit 4, Figure 2; Photograph 6, Annexure
4, par 7.8.
Photograph 9, Annexure 9, Exhibit 4, Figure
4, par 8.9.
Exhibit 4, par
Exhibit 4, par
Exhibit 4, par
Exhibit 4, par
Exhibit 4, par
Exhibit 4, par
Photograph 9, Annexure
EDWF Holdings 1 Pty Ltd v EDWF Holdings 2 Pty Ltd
[2010] WASCA 78
Water Board v Moustakas
(1998) 180 CLR 491
Exhibit 4, par
Exhibit 4, par 8.10, emphasis
Exhibit 4, par
Exhibit 4, par
Exhibit 16.
Exhibit 19.
Exhibit 20.
Exhibit 22.
Exhibit 21.
Exhibit 24.
Exhibit 4, pars 8.15.1 -
Exhibit 4, par
Exhibit 4, par
Exhibit 4, par
Exhibit 4, par
Bundle, page 138, Police Running
Exhibit 18 (Certificate of
Mr Donaldson's Statement of Claim CIV 385 of 2022 filed 29 April 2024, par
Mr Nurse's Amended Defence CIV 385 of 2022 filed 19 September 2024, par
Mr Nurse's Amended Defence CIV 385 of 2022 filed 19 September 2024, par
Photograph 3, Annexure 3, Exhibit 4, Figure
4, Figure 12; ts
4, Figure 12, par 10.3; ts 62; Annexure
Photograph 10, Annexure 10, Exhibit 4, Figure 7; Photograph 11, Annexure 10,
Exhibit 4, Figure
4, par 6.6.
Exhibit 4, Figure
4, par 9.2.
Exhibit 4, par 6.4, Figures 3 and
Photograph 10, Annexure 10, Exhibit 4, Figure
4, par 6.6.
Exhibit 4, par
Exhibit 4, par
Photograph 8, Annexure 8, Exhibit 4, Figure
Photograph 8, Annexure 8, Exhibit 4, Figure 6; ts
4, Figure 11, Exhibit 4, par
Photograph 7, Annexure 8, Exhibit 4, Figure
Exhibit 4, par 11.1; ts
4, par 7.8.
Exhibit 4, par
Exhibit 4, par
Exhibit 4, par
Mr Donaldson's Statement of Claim CIV 385 of 2022 filed 29 April 2024, par
Mr Donaldson's Statement of Claim CIV 385 of 2022 filed 29 April 2024, par
Mr Donaldson's Statement of Claim CIV 385 of 2022 filed 29 April 2024, par
Mr Donaldson's Statement of Claim CIV 385 of 2022 filed 29 April 2024, par
RTA s 64AB(1) and
RTA s 65 as defined in the Regulations to the
O'Connor v Insurance Commission of Western Australia
[69] (Buss JA with McLure P & Mazza JA
Summit Rural (WA) Pty Ltd v Lenane Holdings Pty Ltd
[2024] WASCA
CGU Insurance Ltd v Coote
by his Next Friend Stephen
Desmond Coote)
[2018] WASCA 117
[77] (judgment of the court) (
Department of Housing and Works v Smith [No
[2010] WASCA 25
; (2010) 41 WAR 217 [70] - [83]
(Buss JA) (
Department of Housing and
Department of Housing and Works
D'Souza v Barclays
Building Services (WA) Pty Ltd
[2020] WADC 87
[403] - [405]
Tapp v Australian Bushmen's Campdraft & Rodeo Association Ltd
[2022] HCA 11
(2022) 273 CLR 454
Traffic Authority of NSW v
[2007] HCA 42
234 CLR 330
Perisher Blue Pty Ltd v Nair-Smith
(2015) 90 NSWLR 1,
Blue Pty Ltd
Perisher Blue Pty Ltd
Wyong Shire Council v Shirt
[1980] HCA 12
(1980) 146 CLR 40
Wyong Shire
Wyong Shire Council
and New England Local Health District v McKenna
[2014] HCA 44
(2014) 253 CLR 270
Koehler v Cerebos (Australia) Ltd
[2005] HCA 15
Vairy v Wyong Shire Council
[2005] HCA 62
(2005) 223 CLR
[213] (Callinan & Heydon JJ)
Palace Pty Ltd v Moubarak
[2009] HCA 48
(2009) 239 CLR 420
Adeels Palace
Allied Pumps
Pty Ltd v Hooker
[2020] WASCA 72
[15], [122] (
Shaw v Thomas
[2010] NSWCA 169
Cox v Fellows
[2013] NSWCA 206
Stenning v Sanig
[2015] NSWCA 214
Erickson v Bagley
[2015] VSCA 220
Lightfoot v Rockingham
Wild Encounters Pty Ltd
[2018] WASCA
Wilson v Nilepac Pty Ltd t/as Vision Personal Training (Crows Nest)
[2011] NSWCA
Wyong Shire Council
(47) - (48) (Mason J);
Waverley Council v Ferreira
[2005] NSWCA 418
[45] (Ipp JA
with whom Spigelman CJ & Tobias JA agreed);
[6] - [10], [114];
[401] - [405] (Gething
[70] (Gummow J);
Allied Pumps
[33] (Buss P
& Vaughan JA), [116] (Murphy
Adeels Palace
CGU Insurance
[105], [126] - [129];
Adeels Palace
Allied Pumps
[12], [33],
CGU Insurance
Allied Pumps
Adeels Palace
State of New
South Wales v Fahy
[2007] HCA 20
(2007) 232 CLR 486
[124]; approved in
the formulation of the 'activity' that created the risk of harm in
[232] which favours the narrow
formulation
Adeels Palace
Town of Port Hedland v Reece William
Hodder by Next Friend Elaine Georgina Hodder [No 2]
[2012] WASCA 212
Town of Port
Town of Port Hedland
Gordon v Truong
[2014] NSWCA 97
(2014) 66 MVR 241
[15] - [18].
Podrebersek v Australian Iron & Steel Pty Ltd
(1985) 59 ALJR 492
Apostolic Church Australia Limited v
[2018] WASCA 146
Apostolic Church
[71] citing
Astley v Austrust Ltd
[1999] HCA 6
Commissioner for Railways v Ruprecht
[1979] HCA 37
(1979) 142 CLR
Sungravure Pty Ltd v Meani
[1964] HCA 16
(1964) 110 CLR 24
Port Hedland
Mr Nurse's Defence, par
Mr Nurse's Defence, pars 4(a), (b), (d) and
Mr Nurse's Defence, pars 4(a), (b), (d) or
Wallace v Kam
[2013] HCA 19
(2013) 250 CLR 375
Wallace v Kam
Wallace v Kam
1, Book of Documents, page 74.
2, Book of Documents, page 202.
3, Exhibit 4, Figure 12 and annotated Photograph 3.
4, Exhibit 4, Figure 1.
5, Exhibit 4, Figure 11.
6, Exhibit 4, Figure 2.
7, Exhibit 4, Figure 5.
8, Exhibit 4, Figure 6.
9, Exhibit 4, Figure 10.
10, Exhibit 4, Figure 7.
11, Exhibit 4, Figure 8.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (69.8 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter