URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WASCA/2025/156.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:08:19
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
MJM -v- BNZ [2025] WASCA 156 (30 October 2025)
COURT OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
THE COURT OF APPEAL
[2025] WASCA 156
OCTOBER 2025
DELIVERED :
OCTOBER 2025
CACR 127 of 2024
COURT OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
SJA 1033 of 2024
against convictions - Failing to comply with requirements to supply a breath
sample in accordance with directions - Element
of the offence is that directions
were given as to how to supply the sample - Were such directions given -
Directions may be a combination
of words and conduct and are to be assessed in
the circumstances
Legislation:
Traffic Act 1974
to appeal refused on grounds 1 and
Leave to appeal granted on ground
Representation:
R Panetta & Z R
Solicitors:
State Solicitor's
referred to in decision(s):
OF THE COURT
the early hours of 15 October 2023, the appellant was stopped by police
when driving a car. The police told the appellant that
he was required to
provide a sample of his breath, but he did not do so. The police repeated the
requirement twice more, and held
to the appellant's mouth a breathalyser
machine. The appellant still did not provide a breath sample. The police
arrested the appellant
and took him to the Margaret River police station.
There, the police again told the appellant he was required to give a breath
Again, the appellant did not.
appellant was charged with two offences of failing to provide a breath sample.
The first related to the failure at the roadside.
The second related to the
failure in the police station. The first offence was that the appellant failed
to comply with the requirements
of a police officer to provide a breath sample
for a preliminary test in accordance with the officer's directions, contrary to
Road Traffic Act
(WA) read with
of the Act. The second was that he failed
to comply with the requirement of a police officer to provide a breath sample
for analysis
in accordance with the officer's directions, contrary to
of the Act.
20 May 2024, the appellant was convicted after a trial in the Magistrates
Court of both offences.
appellant sought leave to appeal against those convictions to a single judge of
the Supreme Court. On 8 November 2024, Musikanth
J dismissed the
The appellant now seeks leave to appeal against the dismissal.
appellant's appeal is directed to one element of the first offence; namely, that
had been given directions
by the police officer as to how to give the breath sample
directions element
). The appellant's
core contention is that the primary judge erred in finding that the combined
effect of the police officer's words
and conduct was sufficient to establish the
directions element in relation to the first offence. If that contention is
upheld, the
appellant ought to have been acquitted of the first offence.
Further, as will be explained, the interrelationship between the relevant
provisions of the Act mean that, if the appellant should have been acquitted of
the first offence, he should also have been acquitted
of the second.
ground 1, the appellant alleges that the primary judge erred in
his Honour's application of, or failed to apply,
Ground 2 makes the same kind of complaint in relation to
Apart from complaining about the primary judge's failure to mention these
decisions, the appellant seemingly contends, in effect,
that these cases
establish that the directions element requires that the directions as to how to
give the sample be 'clear and specific'.
the terms in which they are expressed, neither ground is a proper ground of
appeal. However, the appellant is self‑represented.
For that reason, we
would interpret both ground 1 and 2 as alleging that the primary judge
erred in law in construing the directions
element as not requiring the
directions to have been clear and specific.
contains the appellant's core contention ‑ that the primary
judge erred in finding that the combined effect of the
police officer's words
and conduct was sufficient to establish the directions element in relation to
the first offence.
the reasons that follow, we would dismiss the appeal.
Grounds 1 and 2 - alleged error as to construction of
directions element
The legislative framework
was no dispute between the parties as to the effect of the relevant legislative
of the Act, a police officer may require the driver of a motor
vehicle to provide a sample of the person's breath for a preliminary
accordance with the directions of the police officer.
of the Act, where a person, having been so required, refuses or
fails to provide a sample of the person's breath in sufficient quantity
enable a preliminary test to be carried out, a police officer may require that
person to provide a sample of the person's breath
for analysis and may require
that person to accompany a police officer to a police station or some other
place for the purpose of
obtaining that breath sample.
of the Act, a person who is required to supply a sample of the
person's breath for a preliminary test or for analysis must comply
requirement by providing the sample of their breath into approved apparatus in
accordance with the directions of a police
officer or authorised person.
who fails to comply with a requirement made under
who fails to comply with a requirement made under
is an element of each offence that the person
had been given directions
police officer as to how to give the breath sample. That is, a person will not
fail to comply with a requirement to
sample in accordance with the directions of a police officer
person was not given directions as to
to supply the breath
In short, the officer must tell the person what he or she is required to
the power under
of the Act to require a person to provide a
breath sample for analysis only arises where that person refused or failed to
a breath sample for a preliminary test in accordance with the directions
of the police officer. Therefore, if the person had not
been given directions
as to how to supply the breath sample for a preliminary test,
would not apply. In such a case, a police officer could only require a breath
sample for analysis if some other provision of the
Act gave him or her the power
this case, the police officer relied on
as the source of his
power to require from the appellant a sample for analysis in the police station.
Accordingly, if the directions
element was not proved in relation to the first
(roadside) offence, the appellant ought to have been acquitted of both
The nature of the direction required
appellant referred to several cases, including those the subject of
grounds 1 and 2. He contends that those cases establish
enliven the requirement to supply a sample in accordance with the directions of
a police officer, clear and specific directions
must be given as to how to give
would not read into the statutorily created offences adjectives as to the nature
of the directions required. The wording of the
provisions is unambiguous. Nor
do we consider that the authorities relied upon by the appellant did this.
Rather, the authorities
establish that, in determining whether the directions
element has been proved, the question is whether, on the facts, the person
directed as to what he or she was required to do in order to supply the sample.
In other words, the question is whether the
person was told what to do. If the
directions were unclear or vague, the person would not have been told what to
this it follows that no particular form of words is required. Further, the
directions may be given orally and by conduct, and
are to be assessed in all the
circumstances.
appellant also sought to rely on various cases to demonstrate that the
directions given to him were insufficient. In addition
, he relied on
O'Donohue v
Franklin v Couper
Archibald v
of those cases dealt with legislation that was in different terms to the
legislation under consideration in this case. It is
unnecessary to analyse
those differences. That is because, even if the legislative provisions were the
same, a finding in one case
that particular directions were sufficient or
insufficient to tell the person what to do cannot be determinative of whether
given in another case were sufficient or insufficient. Contrary to
the appellant's contention, such findings are not binding precedents.
simply the result of the application of the proper construction of the
legislation to the facts of the case. That is,
whether the directions given in
a particular case did tell the person what to do will turn on the facts and
circumstances of that
case. Further, the circumstances will include the time at
which the case was decided. What is necessary to tell a person in 2023
the appellant is alleged to have committed the offences) as to how to supply a
breath sample may be very different to what
was necessary over 30 years ago
(when all but
of the cases relied upon by the appellant was
determined).
appellant also contended that the primary judge made an error of law in failing
to refer to the cases cited by the
This is not an error of law. His Honour was required to properly construe
the elements of the offences and apply that construction
to the established
The primary judge's reasons
appellant alleged before the primary judge that the magistrate had erred in
finding, among other things, that the police officer
had required the appellant
to provide a sample of his breath within the meaning of
primary judge noted that
is unequivocal in its terms. He noted
that it provides that a police officer may 'require' the driver of a motor
vehicle to provide
a sample of their breath for a preliminary test in accordance
with the 'directions' of the police
His Honour said that there was no statutory basis to justify a view that a
police officer should accompany such a requirement with
any particular 'formula
of words', but that such a requirement must be
primary judge then set out the evidence of what was said and done during the
interaction between the police officers and the
appellant. His Honour
[I]t would have been abundantly clear from the combined effect of the words and
actions of the police officers that what the appellant
was being required and
directed to do was to provide a breath sample by placing his mouth over that
noting that the appellant declined to follow that direction, the primary judge
said that 'the question of what further directions
(if any) may have been
necessary does not
these reasons, his Honour refused leave to appeal on those of the
appellant's grounds of appeal which asserted, in effect, that
the magistrate had
erred in finding that the police officer had required the appellant to provide a
breath sample within the meaning
The primary judge did not misconstrue the directions
noted earlier, the effect of the appellant's complaints in grounds 1
and 2 is that the primary judge misconstrued the directions
element as not
requiring the directions to have been clear and specific.
have already explained that the directions element should be construed as
meaning that the person was told what to do. So understood
grounds 1 and 2
are based on an erroneous premise. The directions element simply requires proof
that the person was directed as
to how to give a breath sample. In any event,
having regard to the primary judge's reasons in their entirety, his Honour
the corresponding ground of appeal in the primary appeal because he
was satisfied that, among other things, the appellant had been
directed as to
how to give a breath sample, as the combination of the words, conduct and
circumstances
made it abundantly clear
what he had to do in order to give a breath sample.
and 2 were not reasonably arguable, and we would not grant leave to appeal
on either ground.
Ground 3 ‑ did the evidence establish
that directions had been given at the roadside as to how to give a breath sample
preliminary test?
The facts established on the evidence
was common ground that, on 15 October 2023, the appellant was stopped by
two police officers while driving a motor vehicle. We
will refer to the
officers as 'Officer 1' and 'Officer 2'. The interaction was recorded
on Officer 1's body‑worn camera.
The footage was tendered in
interaction was relevantly as follows (emphasis
Officer 1: OK. Just been stopped for a driver's licence check and a breath
test and few other checks.
Officer 2: Do you have your driver's licence with you sir?
Appellant: Yes.
Cool, can we see
Appellant: Can I decline?
Officer 2: No.
[Officer 1 reaches through open window and removes car keys
from ignition]
Officer 1: Now we need to see your driver's
licence and we need ‑
You can see my driver's
Officer 1: That's fine.
Appellant: Other than that ‑ I'm gonna [pause] withhold my right
to remain silent.
Officer 1: We're not asking you any questions.
Officer 2: We just want to check your licence.
Officer 1: So what ‑ what happens
[Appellant passes his licence to Officer 2 through the car
Appellant: You just asked me for my driver's licence.
Officer 1: Yea, yea so we're asking for your driver's licence and
Appellant: I'm not arguing I'm sorry.
Officer 1: OK.
So I'm going to place you
under requirement now to provide a breath test
[Officer 1 turns on machine]
So I now require you to submit
a sample of your breath for analysis, for a prelim breath test.
Appellant: I'm gonna decline.
Officer 1: OK. So just to let you know this is being recorded. If you
decline you are going to be charged with refusing, you're
going to be arrested
and taken back to Margaret River police station. OK?
[Officer 1 inserts plastic‑wrapped mouthpiece into
machine. Officer 1 holds machine up outside the car window]
So I now require you to submit
a sample of your breath for analysis.
Do you want to provide us that
[Appellant shakes his head and says nothing]
Officer 1: You're not going to provide it?
[Appellant looks at Officer 1 saying nothing]
Officer 1: I'll give you one more go.
I now require you to provide a sample of breath for analysis.
[Officer 1 removes plastic wrapping from straw
mouthpiece]
I now require a sample of
Officer 1 places breath
analyser into car window, holding it in front of the appellant's face, level
with his mouth, at a distance
of a few centimetres, for about
20 seconds.
The appellant says and does nothing]
Officer 1: You're not going to provide one to me? Are you refusing?
[Appellant remains silent]
I am asking you because this is all being recorded and you are
going to be charged with refusing and we're going to arrest you and
Appellant: I told you I am not answering any questions and
Officer 1: OK no worries.
[Officer 1 removes breath machine away from appellant's
face, out of car window]
At the moment you are placed under arrest. You are now in our
custody. You are now coming back to Margaret River police station.
exchange formed the basis for the first (roadside) offence. Officer 1 gave
unchallenged evidence that the machine was an
'Alcolizer'.
appellant was subsequently taken to Margaret River police station by the police
officers. At the police station, the appellant
was required to provide a breath
sample for analysis and given directions as to how to do so. This too was
recorded by the body‑worn
camera. The appellant does not contend that the
directions given at the station were
insufficient.
What directions were given for the roadside test (the
first offence)
relation to the requirements made at the roadside, the appellant notes that the
officers did not use the word 'blow', did not
demonstrate how or where to blow,
and did not show him the word 'blow' on the breath testing
appellant submits that the brand name 'Alcolizer' was printed in small font on
the machine. He says it was not reasonable to
assume that the appellant could
read the font to identify the machine held by Officer 1 while light was being
shined in his
appellant noted that the primary judge, in describing what could be seen on the
body-worn camara footage, said that something
'appeared to be a straw'. The
appellant submits that this cast doubt on whether it was a
The footage was an exhibit in the trial. We have watched that footage.
Officer 1 can be seen to attach a plastic‑wrapped
mouthpiece into the machine.
body-worn camera footage establishes the
told the appellant three times that he was required to 'submit' or 'provide' a
sample of breath for analysis.
was holding a small orange machine while making those three
statements.
Officer 1 made the second statement, he inserted a plastic‑wrapped
mouthpiece into the top of the machine and held the
machine out in the
appellant's direction.
making the third statement, Officer 1 removed the plastic wrapper from the
mouthpiece, moved the machine through the open car
window, and held it close to
the appellant's mouth, adding 'I now require a sample of breath'.
held the machine in front of, and within a few centimetres
the appellant's mouth for about
20 seconds. For the first seven seconds, there was no torch light on the
appellant at all. After
that, there was torch light in the direction of the
appellant. Its beam was focused on the upper part of the driver's side door
the appellant's right shoulder and upper chest. At no point during this time
was the beam directed into the appellant's face.
our view, both the learned magistrate and the primary judge were correct to find
that the directions element had been established
beyond reasonable doubt.
had removed a plastic wrapper from the mouthpiece. He held the machine directly
in front of, and near to, the appellant's
mouth. Considering these actions in
isolation, there were two options open to the driver ‑ to blow
into the mouthpiece or
to suck on the mouthpiece. However, in addition to the
police officer's actions, he told the appellant that he required a breath
sample. The only reasonable interpretation of the officer's actions and words
was that the appellant was being directed to provide
a breath sample by blowing
into the mouthpiece. As was said by the primary judge, it was abundantly
oral submissions, the appellant accepted that a reasonable Australian would have
understood that they were being asked to blow
mouthpiece.
He said, however, that a foreigner who had not been exposed to Australian
publications and advertisements about random breath tests
may not have
understood 'the directions and whether they had to
It appeared from this, and from other submissions made by the
that the appellant contended that any directions would be inadequate if the
person was not aware that they were legally obliged to
provide a breath sample.
offence of failing to supply a breath sample requires proof that the accused was
required to give a breath sample, was given
directions as to how to do that, and
did not give a sample in accordance with those directions. It does not require
proof that the
driver knew that, in such circumstances, he or she was legally
obliged to provide a breath sample.
completeness, we note that, while the directions given to the appellant made it
plain that he had to blow into the mouthpiece
of the machine, they did not make
plain how hard he had to blow or for how long. For that reason, if the
appellant had blown into
the mouthpiece of the machine, he would not have failed
to supply a sample in accordance with the directions, even if the resulting
sample was insufficient for the purposes of the test. If that had occurred, the
police would have needed to give him directions
as to how hard he needed to blow
and for how long. Only if he then failed to follow those further directions
could it have been
said that he failed to supply a sample in accordance with the
directions.
may be that police officers consider that motorists these days will be familiar
with breath test machines and know that a firm
breath of some duration is
required for a sample to register. Nevertheless, giving those directions at the
outset would take little
time, and may avoid the need for repeated attempts in
some cases.
The direction was not 'clouded' by other
his submissions, the appellant referred to
Archibald v
in which Walsh J noted that a direction can be 'clouded' by an earlier
direction. In
the accused had been told and shown what to do by the authorised
breathalyser operator. However, another (unauthorised) officer gave
conflicting
instructions. On appeal, Walsh J held that it was open to the magistrate
to conclude that two subsequent directions
of the authorised officer were
clouded by the conflicting direction of the unauthorised officer. Walsh J
held that the magistrate
had not erred in finding, in those circumstances, that
he was not satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that a proper direction had been
appellant submits that the directions he was given were 'clouded' in two ways.
that Officer 2 had said 'we just want to check your licence'. The
appellant appears to submit that this meant that the directions
Officer 1 to supply a breath sample were confusing.
do not accept this.
is no reason why a police officer could not decide, during the course of a
licence check, to then require a breath sample.
The legislation does not
Further, and in any event, Officer 1 told the appellant, after
introductions, that he had 'been stopped for a driver's licence check
breath test and a few other checks'. Officer 2's remark 'we just want to
check your licence' was said after the appellant
had said they could see his
licence, but he was otherwise going to exercise his right to silence.
the appellant had handed over his driver's licence, Officer 1 said 'So I'm
going to place you under requirement now to provide
a breath test. So I now
require you to submit a sample of your breath for analysis, for a prelim breath
test'. These, and the subsequent
statements made by Officer 1 requiring a
breath sample, were not clouded by the earlier requirement that the appellant
provide his
driver's licence. The breath sample requirements were
self‑evidently different, and additional, to the driver's licence
requirement.
second way in which the appellant submits that the directions he was given were
'clouded' is because he contends that Officer
2 made three 'orders', two of
which the officer was not allowed to issue, and the last of which was 'even more
'orders' to which the appellant refers
(a) 'So, I now require you to submit a sample of your breath for analysis, for a
prelim breath test, OK?'
(b) 'So, I now require you to submit a sample of your breath for analysis.'
(c) 'I now require a sample of
do not accept that the use of the word 'analysis' by Officer 2 could have
'clouded' the requirement that the appellant provide
a sample of his
accept that, at the roadside, the police officers' power was to require a sample
of breath for a preliminary test, under
We further accept that
the legislation distinguishes between a sample of breath for a preliminary test
and a sample of breath for
analysis. However, the use of the word 'analysis' in
the context of requiring a person to supply a breath sample could not have
caused any confusion as to what the appellant was being asked to do, nor how he
was to do it.
any event, the first statement of requirement made by Officer 1 was 'I now
require you to submit a sample of your breath for analysis,
for a prelim breath
test'. When Officer 1 made the second and third statements, he was plainly
repeating the same requirement.
The appellant had said 'I am gonna decline'
after the first statement. Officer 1 gave the appellant further
opportunities to comply,
saying, before making the third statement, 'I'll give
you one more go'.
was there any inconsistency or conflict in the directions. The appellant was,
by words and conduct, being directed to blow into
the Alcolizer machine that was
being held by Officer 1 a few centimetres from the appellant's
The directions element was proved
are satisfied that the evidence established the directions element beyond
reasonable doubt.
would grant leave to appeal on ground 3, but would dismiss
would make the following
to appeal on grounds 1 and 2 is refused.
to appeal on ground 3 is granted.
appeal is dismissed.
would hear from the parties as to whether any further orders are
certify that the preceding paragraph(s) comprise the reasons for decision of the
Supreme Court of Western Australia.
Associate to the Hon Justice
30 OCTOBER 2025
Hammond v Lavender
(1976) 11 ALR 371
Brown v Liddelow
(1988) 7 MVR 452.
Other than a person to whom
applies. That subsection did not
apply to the
Other than a person to whom
applies. That subsection did not
apply to the
Dobie v Pinker
[1982] WASC 322
[1983] WAR 48
, 52 (Kennedy J) and
(454) citing
Franklin v Couper
(Unreported, WASC, Library No 2145, 30 September 1977)
Archibald v Barndon
[1991] WASC 321
(1991) 16 MVR 239
O'Donohue v Murray
(Unreported, WASC, Library No 2262, 20 February 1978).
Lambert v Tomasini
(Unreported, WASCA, Library No 4350, 30 November
Director of Public
Prosecutions (NSW) v Bolton
[2007] NSWSC 1030
(2007) 178 A Crim R
R v Nicholls
Of the cases cited by the appellant, only
was decided
in the last 30 years. In
common ground that the accused had been told what to
By way of illustration, see
Lester v Police
[2013] SASCFC 123
; (2013) 118 SASR
Appellant's submissions
Primary reasons
Primary reasons
Primary reasons [41] ‑ [42] referring to
Primary reasons
Primary reasons [51] referring to
Primary reasons
Exhibit 1 body‑worn camera footage.
Exhibit 1 body‑worn camera footage 00:49 ‑ 02:38.
Appellant's submissions
Appellant's submissions
Appellant's submissions
See ts 12.9 ‑ 13.2, 15.8, 17.2,
19.2 ‑ 20.2,
Prior to amendments made in 1988, a police officer needed to have reasonable
grounds to believe that one of three possible matters
existed before he or she
could require a driver to provide a breath
Appellant's submissions [52] ‑ [55].
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (243 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter