URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WASCA/2025/150.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:08:08
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
AAI LIMITED trading as GIO -v- PILBARA IRON COMPANY (SERVICES) PTY LTD [2025] WASCA 150 (17 October 2025)
COURT OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
THE COURT OF APPEAL
LIMITED trading as GIO -v- PILBARA IRON COMPANY (SERVICES) PTY LTD
[2025] WASCA
OCTOBER 2025
DELIVERED :
OCTOBER 2025
CACV 56 of 2024
LIMITED trading as GIO
IRON COMPANY (SERVICES) PTY LTD
COURT OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
-v- PILBARA IRON COMPANY (SERVICES) PTY LTD
[2024] WADC 72
CIV 3707 of 2020
- Negligence - Collision between front end loader and haul truck - Labour hire
company - Whether hirer of worker owed non‑delegable
duty of care to
worker - Vicarious liability - Civil liability Act 2002
Insurance - Entitlement to
indemnity - Policy extension - Defence
Legislation:
Liability Act 2002
Cross‑appeal
Representation:
J J Sheldrick
G R Hancy & J
No appearance
Solicitors:
Mills Oakley
Minter Ellison
Percy Kakulas
referred to in decision(s):
P & BOND AJA
Introduction
appeal concerns one aspect of the complex web of relationships which arises from
the use of labour hire firms. The particular
question here relates to the basis
of the liability of a principal in a labour hire relationship for injuries to
the worker hired
to the principal. The injuries to the hired worker were caused
by the negligent actions of one of the principal's employees.
is no dispute in this case that the principal is liable for the hired worker's
injuries, but the issue concerns the basis of
that liability. Is the basis a
breach of a non‑delegable duty owed to the injured worker, or vicarious
liability for the actions
of the principal's negligent employee?
significance of the answer to this question lies in the workers' compensation
insurance policy of the labour hire firm (which
also applies to common law
liabilities). The labour hire firm obtained an extension of this policy to
cover the principal. The
insurer claims that this extension only relates to a
breach of a non‑delegable duty by the principal, not to vicarious
of the principal for common law damages.
Ultimately,
this matter turns upon the proper construction of the terms of the extension of
the insurance indemnity for common law
liability. However, it is important to
understand that this exercise occurs in the context of the overall arrangements
between the
parties, in order to appreciate the significance of what is being
decided. That is particularly so where the labour hire firm, which
procured the
extension, is not a party before this court.
plaintiff at trial was Mr Fussell. He was the injured worker who was
employed by
which is a labour hire
Mr Fussell was operating a haul truck at the West Angelas iron ore
He was injured when there was a collision between his stationary haul truck and
a front end loader, which was digging ore and waste
material out of an ore
The front end loader was operated by
Mr Reidy was an experienced operator of front end
He was employed by Pilbara Iron Company (Services) Pty Ltd
), which was the defendant at
operation of a loader to load a haul truck involved the haul truck reversing at
an angle towards the ore face and parking. The
loader would then perform two
manoeuvres to load the truck. First, it would drive towards the ore face and
dig ore or waste material
out of the face (
). The loader would then reverse away from the dig face in an arc
with a loaded bucket. Secondly, the loader would drive towards
the parked truck
with the loaded bucket. The loader would then deposit the load into the truck,
and back away from the truck in
This is depicted in the illustration below, which the trial judge incorporated
instruction manual provided to loader operators explained how to perform the
second part of the manoeuvre (loading the dump truck)
in the following
to forward (F), then go forward, smoothly turning the wheel to approach the dump
truck square on.
the bucket so that the bucket does not touch the tray when it is dumped. Do not
raise the bucket more than required.
the material in the center of the dump tray.
was no explanation of how to perform the first part of the manoeuvre (reversing
away from the dig face) in the instruction
operation manuals provided to loader operators generally instructed the operator
to keep a safe distance from other machinery.
For example, the Komatsu
Operation and Maintenance manual
When travelling or carrying out operations, always keep a safe distance from
people, structures, or other machines to avoid coming
into contact with
the 'Pit Permit Rules', which applied to operation of the loader in the mining
pit, generally
4.9.7 Clearance
It is the responsibility of the operator to ensure the vehicle or
equipment has adequate clearance when reversing, passing or overtaking
vehicles and equipment.
the instructions mentioned in the last two paragraphs were general ones, and not
given in respect of the particular activity
of loading a haul truck.
employees who worked at West Angelas were integrated into PICS' workforce and
supervised by PICS' supervisors. This included
them being assigned tasks each
morning by a PICS supervisor at a pre‑start
collision in this case occurred on 4 July 2018 when the haul truck operated
by Mr Fussell had reversed up to the ore face, and
was parked at an angle
next to it. Mr Reidy was using the loader to dig material out of the dig
face and to place loads of this
material into the haul truck. As Mr Reidy was
reversing away from the face on the third pass, a section of the face came away
large rocks in his path. To avoid running over the rocks and damaging
the loader, Mr Reidy swung the loader around in an arc later
than normal.
He described what occurred in the following way in answer to questions from the
You said you turned, and it was during the turning that the bucket hit the - the
truck? --- Yes.
And if you look at the picture again, you'll see that the loader is straight,
it's not depicted as turning? --- That's correct.
Okay. So it is your evidence that the loader was straight or that the loader was
turning? --- It's - when the collision happened
Yes? --- --- it was articulated. And it was the - going back straighter, because
of the face collapse ---
Yes? --- --- to create extra distance.
Yes? --- And then having to articulate more because an articulated vehicle - you
gotta imagine, when you articulate, it actually
swings the front end a bit, so
because I went back straighter, and then had to articulate harder, it put the
bucket closer to the
rear of the truck.
Okay. So when the collision occurred, was the truck or the loader, sorry,
straight, as - as depicted in this picture, or was it articulated?
Articulated.
references to a picture in this answer are to a diagram which Mr Reidy drew
in the Incident Statement Form. That diagram is
articulation of the loader as it reversed away from the dig face resulted in the
tooth of the loader bucket hitting the back
left hand corner of the haul
The impact of the collision caused injury to Mr Fussell. The quantum of
agreed damages was $1.1
trial judge found that a reasonable person in the position of PICS would have
instructed that a loader was required to stay a
minimum distance of at least
three metres away from the haul truck when digging from the dig
The trial judge considered that if this instruction had been given, it would
evidently, this instruction would have been applicable to the first part of the
manoeuvres which we have described in [6] above.
That is, the instruction would
apply when the loader was reversing away from the dig face. It would not apply
to the second part
of the manoeuvre, when the loader is driven up to the truck
to deposit its load. This was accepted by counsel during the
trial judge considered that PICS was negligent and breached a
non‑delegable duty to provide and enforce the instruction
minimum distance of at least three metres away from the haul truck when the
loader was reversing away from the dig
trial judge also considered that Mr Reidy was negligent, because he failed
to maintain a safe distance from Mr Fussell's haul
truck to ensure that if
he had to suddenly manoeuvre the front end loader, he would not hit the
trial, PICS brought third party proceedings against the workers compensation
insurer for WorkPac (
). GIO is the
appellant in this appeal. The basis upon which PICS brought the third party
proceedings against GIO is that the workers
compensation policy issued by GIO to
WorkPac contained an extension of liability to a contractual principal of
The policy extension provides that it '... is to be read in conjunction with and
forms part of ...' the workers compensation policy
issued to WorkPac.
of the policy extension
4.1 Injury to, or death of, an Employee arises out of and occurs during the
performance of the work required to be done by you under
a contract with a
Principal during the Policy Period;
4.2 the Employee is employed in, and, at the time when the Injury occurs, is
working in the Business; and
4.3 the injury or death is caused or contributed to by the Principal's
negligence and the Principal is liable to pay damages, or
to contribute to an
award of damages, for that Injury or death;
we shall indemnify the Principal against that Common Law
of the policy extension provides:
The Principal's entitlement to indemnity shall be subject to, governed by and
limited by the Policy Period, limits of indemnity,
exclusions, conditions and
other terms of the Policy, except Condition 9, as if the Principal were the
employer of your injured or
deceased Employee.
policy extension also defines 'Principal' as
purposes of this extension 'Principal' shall mean any party for whom you perform
work during the Policy Period provided that
the work is within the scope of the
Business and for the purpose of the Principal's business.
trial judge considered that the policy extension operated in favour of PICS,
which was able to seek indemnity for its liability
of $1.1 million against
GIO. However, the trial judge held that the policy did not extend to indemnify
PICS for the costs of defending
the proceedings brought by the
Consequently, the trial judge declared that GIO was liable to indemnify PICS
against the liability of PICS to pay the amount of the
judgment for
$1.1 million.
Nature of appeal
has appealed against the declaration of its liability to indemnify PICS, but has
not appealed against the judgment for the plaintiff
against PICS for
$1.1 million.
PICS is the first respondent to this appeal. The plaintiff has been joined as
the second respondent, but indicated that he did not
intend to take part in the
essentially has two substantive grounds of appeal.
GIO says that PICS should not have been
to have been negligent for failing to mandate an instruction to the drivers of
loaders to remain at a particular minimum safe distance
of at least three metres
from haul trucks when reversing away from a dig face to load a haul truck. GIO
says that PICS should only
have been held liable to Mr Fussell upon the
basis of being vicariously liable for the negligence of Mr Reidy to
maintain a safe
distance from Mr Fussell's haul truck in all of the
circumstances.
GIO says that, on a proper construction of the indemnity under the policy
extension, GIO's liability to provide an indemnity was
not satisfied where PICS
was liable vicariously for the actions of its employee, but was not itself
these grounds are both established, GIO says that the trial judge erred in fact
and law in holding GIO liable to indemnify PICS
for the vicarious liability of
PICS to Mr Fussell for the negligence of
This forms the basis of a third appeal ground, which effectively depends upon
the outcome of grounds 1 and 2.
Nature of the cross‑appeal
has cross‑appealed upon the ground that the trial judge erred in law in
that the appellant was not entitled to indemnity for the costs of defending the
plaintiff's claim. PICS says that the policy extension
provided that the terms
of the insurance contract applied as if the Principal were the employer of the
injured employee, and the
terms of the insurance contract provided the insured
employer with indemnity for legal costs incurred by the
Appeal ground 1
ground 1 is in the following terms:
The trial judge erred in fact in finding (at [95]) that the first respondent
breached its duty of care to the second respondent by
failing to mandate a
particular minimum safe distance of at least three metres when the correct
finding, on the basis of the evidence
before the trial judge and his findings of
fact, was that the first respondent did not breach its duty of care in that
Particulars
(a) The first respondent implemented measures before the collision to guard
against the risk of injury from a collision between haul
truck and loader while
the haul truck was being loaded.
(b) Upon the proper application of the balancing exercise required by
Civil Liability Act
(WA) and the principles contained in
Wyong v Shirt
(which was not
undertaken by the trial judge), the evidence and findings of fact did not
establish that it was negligent for the first
respondent to not take the
additional step found by the trial judge in addition to the measures taken
before the collision.
(c) The evidence and findings of fact did not establish:
(i) that a particular minimum distance of three metres ought to have been
contemplated by the first respondent before the collision;
(ii) how loader operators ought practically "measure" the three metre minimum
distance when performing their loader operator duties
and hence it did not
constitute a reasonably practicable alternative method.
(d) The evidence of those with relevant expertise did not establish that the
step found by the trial judge was required before the
is some irony in this ground of appeal. GIO submits that PICS was not negligent
for failing to specify a system of work which
contained an instruction for
loader operators to keep a particular distance from a haul truck when backing
away from the dig face.
However, PICS accepts that it
negligent in the manner found by
Yet PICS has not made any formal admission to this effect. In these
circumstances (and potentially even had it made such an admission),
the finding
by the trial judge is open to challenge on an appeal by GIO in the usual way.
effect, GIO argues that PICS did not have a duty to provide particular
directions about how to load the haul truck, and the safe
distance which a
loader had to stay away from a haul truck when digging ore and waste material
and reversing away from the dig face.
This is because PICS had extensively
trained and tested the loader operators, and they knew that they had to maintain
a safe distance
from a haul truck. In other words, GIO says that PICS had no
duty to prescribe a safe system of work specifically for digging and
haul truck, because the loader operators were trained and tested to operate the
loaders safely.
argument is evident from the submissions filed by GIO. It was submitted
In summary, the trial judge ought to have found that the plaintiff had failed to
establish that [PICS] was negligent, based on the
following matters (each of
which is then dressed in detail under subsequent subheadings):
(a) [PICS] implemented measures before the collision to guard against the risk
of injury from a collision between haul truck and
loader while the haul truck
was being loaded. In summary, they were: a comprehensive assessment of the
competency of the operators;
a requirement that they hold the appropriate
license; the issuance of a Pit Permit; documented rules and instructions to
adequate clearance when reversing, passing or overtaking other vehicles
and equipment and always leave a safe distance from people,
structures or other
machines to avoid contact.
(b) In conducting the balancing exercise required by
Wyong v Shirt
, the evidence and
findings of fact did not establish that, notwithstanding the existing measures
in place before the collision, the
probability that the harm would occur
remained such that it was negligent of [PICS] not to take the additional step
before the collision.
(c) The evidence and findings did not establish that a particular minimum
distance of three metres ought to have been contemplated
by [PICS] before the
accident nor how loader operators ought practically 'measure' the
three‑metre minimum distance when performing
their loader operator duties,
in order to establish that it was a reasonably practicable alternative
(d) The evidence of those with relevant expertise did not establish that the
step found by the trial judge was required before the
our view, this is an ambitious submission. In substance, it is an argument that
PICS was not required to particularly prescribe
a safe system of work
specifically for the repeated and common activity of digging ore from a dig face
and loading a truck with that
material, simply because PICS had trained and
tested its drivers to act safely. In other words, GIO's submission is that
training loader operators to keep a safe distance from other machinery
and objects itself constituted a safe system of work, and
it was unnecessary to
go further and prescribe rules for the particular activity of digging and
loading a stationary truck at the
is no dispute that PICS assessed the competency of drivers, and that they had to
obtain a 'Pit Permit'. There is no doubt
that PICS had published extensive
manuals for the operation of loaders, and that it required its operators to be
familiar with the
terms of these manuals. However, none of these things
specifically prescribed a minimum distance which a loader should remain away
from a truck while digging material from a dig face and backing away from the
dig face. The most that was prescribed was that, generally
during operation, a
loader should always be a safe distance from other
particular activity of using a loader to dig ore and other material from a dig
face, and then load a truck, was a common one.
Indeed it was the whole point of
the mining operation. In our view, there is little doubt that PICS owed a duty
to all people involved
in that activity to prescribe and implement a safe system
of work to carry out that particular activity. This should have involved
considering the particular activity and implementing rules to be followed, to
the extent that these rules were necessary and practicable
to reduce foreseeable
risks in carrying out that particular activity. In our view, it was not
sufficient simply to employ skilled
and trained operators to operate the
machinery involved.
this context, it is apt to set out the discussion of the duty to provide a safe
system of work contained in
Fleming's The Law
Although of relatively modern formulation, one of the most important facets of
the employer's duty is to establish and enforce a
safe system of work.
Managerial control over the organisation exacts a corresponding responsibility
for such matters as the co‑ordination
of activities, layout of equipment,
method of using machines and carrying out particular processes, safety
instruction of personnel,
provision of safety devices and encouragement of their
use, in addition to the residual task of planning and supervising the general
conditions under which work is carried out. (citations omitted)
passage emphasises that the duty to provide a safe system of work involves a
responsibility for planning 'the co‑ordination
of activities, layout of
equipment, method of using machines and carrying out particular processes [and]
safety instruction of personnel'.
This is a duty related to the particular
processes, as well as the 'general conditions under which work is carried
explained, various manuals tendered in evidence prescribed how to conduct
operations.
However, none specified a safe distance for a loader to keep from a truck while
carrying out the digging and reversing operations.
The fact that the manuals
prescribed how to carry out loading operations shows that PICS did attempt to
prescribe a system of work
for the operation of digging ore and loading a truck.
The critical question is whether PICS should have prescribed a minimum safe
distance to stay away from a truck of three metres when reversing away from the
deciding this issue, this court will give weight to the primary judge's
conclusion, but must reach and give effect to its own
conclusion. Whether PICS
was negligent or not is a question to be determined by an appeal court applying
the correctness standard.
It does not defer to the decision of the trial judge
in the same way that appellate review of discretionary or evaluative decisions
requires appellate
determining this issue, we accept the following principle referred to by Murphy
and Beech JJA in
A failure to eliminate a reasonably foreseeable risk does not establish
negligence. Proper enquiry at the breach stage involves
identifying with some
precision what a reasonable person would have done by way of response to the
foreseeable risk. It is fundamental
that the question of whether a defendant
breached its duty to exercise reasonable care is to be approached prospectively,
the benefit of hindsight.
This was a point which was emphasised by GIO, both in its
written and oral submissions.
can be little doubt that prescribing a minimum safe distance for a loader to
keep from a truck while reversing away from the
dig face was a precaution which
could have been taken. An instruction to remain at least three metres away from
the truck, was implemented
after the incident
determining whether a reasonable person would have given that instruction prior
to the incident, it is necessary to consider the
matters prescribed by
Civil Liability Act 2002
(a) the first matter is the probability that the harm against which the
precaution protects would occur if care were not taken.
In our view, although
loader operators were trained and tested to operate a loader safely, it is
obvious that the closer that a loader
comes to a truck, the greater the
probability of harm. Consequently, if a loader remains more than three metres
away from a stationary
truck, the risk of harm is reduced or diminished to a low
point, whereas if the loader comes closer than this distance, the risk
probability of harm would increase as the distance apart decreases. We do not
think that expert evidence is required to establish
that if a distance of three
metres between a loader and a truck is always observed, the risk of collision is
low. Obviously, if
there is always a distance of three metres, there can be no
(b) the next matter is the likely seriousness of harm. Again, it is obvious
that if a loader comes into contact with a stationary
haul truck, this involves
two large pieces of machinery colliding. The likely seriousness of the harm may
well be significant;
(c) the third matter which must be considered is the burden of taking
precautions to avoid the risk of harm. There does not appear
particular burden associated with maintaining a distance of three metres away
from a stationary truck while undertaking
loading operations. Certainly, no
evidence of this was positively adduced by PICS, such as evidence that
maintaining this distance
would mean less productive operations;
(d) the last matter to be considered is the social utility of the activity that
creates the risk of harm. It is evident that mining
activity produces an
economic benefit. This is really a neutral factor in the present
our view, all of these matters militate in favour of the conclusion that an
instruction should have been given that a loader operator
should not move the
loader within a specified minimum distance of a haul truck, while the loader is
loading up its bucket. We also
consider that a minimum distance of three metres
is reasonable. That is the distance which in fact was later specified by
knowledgeable
responsible for supervising the mining operations. As well, the front end
loader's bucket is 6.55 m
It seems reasonable to allow an area for manoeuvres which is approximately half
the width of the bucket.
also contends that a duty to maintain a minimum distance of three metres between
a loader and a haul truck is practically difficult,
because of difficulty in
measuring this distance precisely while operating the loader. That is a point
with little merit. Obviously,
some estimation by the operator will be required.
It has not been suggested that the average person is incapable of estimating the
distance of three metres.
trial judge found that if an instruction to maintain a particular minimum safe
distance of three metres had been specified, this
would have been followed by
This finding has not been challenged.
all of these reasons, we consider that the trial judge was correct in concluding
that there was a duty upon PICS to prescribe
a safe minimum distance of three
metres to be maintained between the loader and a stationary haul truck while the
loader was loading
its bucket and manoeuvring to get into position to load the
conclusion means that the appeal must fail. That is because both grounds 1
and 2 would need to be established for the appellant
to succeed.
Nonetheless, we will also consider ground 2, but for reasons which we will
come to, we will not finally determine it.
Appeal ground 2
of the appeal is as
The trial judge erred in law in failing to find that the meaning of 'Principal's
negligence' under the policy was not satisfied where
the Principal was liable
vicariously but was not itself negligent.
preliminary observations may be made about this ground.
various members of the High Court have recently observed that the term
'vicarious liability' is an expression with various
It appears that the ground of appeal intends to use the phrase to
... cases of secondary liability based on attribution of liability, not
attribution of the acts, of a wrongdoer to a defendant.
This is vicarious
liability in its true or proper sense ‑ liability based on the
attribution of the liability of another.
As is self‑evident, vicarious
liability is a form of strict liability, whereby a defendant is held liable for
the wrongs of
another, despite the defendant being free of fault.
is in contrast to liability based upon attribution of acts to a principal, or
imposing liability upon a principal based upon
a non‑delegable duty. As
the plurality said in
The first area of law where the expression 'vicarious liability' has been used
is where one person is, in a broad sense, the agent
of another. It is a form of
primary liability where the
another person are attributed to the defendant on the basis that the acts were
done for the defendant with the defendant's express,
implied or apparent
authorisation of the acts, or ratification of the acts by the defendant. In
other words, the acts were done
with the defendant's 'seal of ... approval',
amounting to an acceptance of the acts as the defendant's own. For this form of
based on vicarious acts or vicarious conduct, the expression
'vicarious liability' is inapposite. Thus, in contrast to true vicarious
liability, it is not the liability, but the acts of the agent that are
attributed to the principal. (original emphasis)
The plurality also
A 'non-delegable' or 'personal' duty of care is 'a duty ... of a special and
"more stringent" kind'. It is not merely a duty to
take care, but a 'duty
ensure that reasonable care is
'; to 'ensure that the duty is carried out'; or to 'procur[e] the
careful performance of work [assigned] to others'. Liability for
breach of a
non‑delegable duty is therefore direct ‑ not vicarious.
(footnotes omitted) (original emphasis)
second preliminary observation is that determining ground 2 requires the
court to reach a conclusion about the proper construction
of cl 4 of the
policy extension. However, it is notable that the court has been asked to
answer this question of construction essentially
in a vacuum. There is no
extrinsic evidence of the terms of the negotiations and contract between PICS
and WorkPac which led to
WorkPac seeking the policy extension from GIO. Nor is
there any extrinsic evidence of the terms of the request for a policy extension
by WorkPac to GIO, and no evidence of any negotiations between WorkPac and GIO.
In these circumstances, if the question of construction
raised by ground 2
is determined, it would have to be resolved simply by reference to the terms of
the policy extension themselves.
absence of extrinsic evidence of the type just mentioned represents a
significant evidentiary lacuna. It seems likely that WorkPac
would have been
required to obtain certain insurances extending to PICS as part of the
contractual arrangements between WorkPac and
PICS. It also seems likely that
WorkPac would have informed GIO about the requirements of PICS, and would have
negotiated about
these. If these presumptions are correct, any ambiguous words
in the terms of the policy and the extension would need to be construed
resolved by reference to the extrinsic evidence, and what was commonly known by
the relevant
For example, it might be relevant if it was commonly known that WorkPac was a
labour hire company, supplying workers to be integrated
into PICS' workforce.
the court enquired about the existence of extrinsic evidence with counsel, it
appeared that the possible significance of the
described had been
overlooked.
If that is so, the court is being asked to pronounce upon the meaning of the
primary policy and the policy extension without considering
potentially
significant material, and in the absence of WorkPac as a party before it.
our view, it is undesirable to finally construe the policy and policy extension
without the presence of WorkPac as a party to
the proceedings, and where it does
not appear that the possible relevance of extrinsic material has been fully
investigated (eg by
seeking such material on a subpoena from WorkPac). For
that reason, we shall set out our views about the proper construction of
cl 4 of the policy extension, based upon the available material. However,
these views should not be regarded as final, where it
is unnecessary to
determine the construction to resolve the appeal, and there might be other
relevant material which should be investigated.
to this caveat, it is helpful to begin considering the meaning of the policy
extension by examining the particular terms
of the policy and the extension.
primary policy issued by GIO is a workers compensation policy. There are
12 named insured, including Workpac Pty Ltd.
primary policy describes the business of the insured as 'Gold Ore Mining Above
It does not describe the business as relating to labour hire.
primary policy defines 'Common Law Liability' to mean the liability of a named
insured to a Worker for Damages (as well as certain
other liabilities under
This definition does not distinguish between a liability of a named insured to
pay damages to a worker based upon whether the liability
arises from breach of a
non‑delegable duty, or whether the liability arises from a named insured's
vicarious liability for
the actions of another worker. Notwithstanding the
different juridical nature of these liabilities, in each case there is a 'Common
Law Liability', as the named insured has a liability to a worker to pay damages
(which means damages due, claimed or paid independently
Workers' Compensation and Injury Management
it comes to the operation of cl 4 of the policy extension, the insurer
states that if the conditions in clauses 4.1, 4.2 and
satisfied, so that Injury or death is 'caused by or contributed to by the
Principal's negligence and the Principal is liable
to pay damages, or to
contribute to an award of damages' for that injury or death, 'we shall indemnify
the Principal against that
Common Law Liability'.
argues that in a case of true vicarious liability, the Principal will not ever
have been negligent, and therefore the condition
in cl 4.3 will not be
satisfied. That is because the injury or death will not have been caused by or
contributed to by the 'Principal's
negligence', ie the Principal's fault.
However, we consider that the use of the term 'Principal's negligence' is
ambiguous. It
might refer only to cases where the Principal has directly
breached a duty to a worker, or it could include cases of attributed negligence,
where there is no personal negligence by the Principal but the Principal is
vicariously liable for the fault of another worker.
We do not regard the phrase
as only clearly referring to direct breaches of a non‑delegable duty.
Consequently, we do not
accept the fundamental point of departure for the
submissions made by GIO.
our view, that question of ambiguity is resolved by the later description of the
liability as a 'Common Law Liability'. As we
have explained, that phrase can
cover both direct and attributed fault.
accept that this reasoning is not, by itself, decisive. That is because
cl 4.3 might be construed as referring only to a subset
of Common Law
Liabilities. However, we see no rationale for why it should do so.
are a by‑product of carrying on business and 'are to be construed in a
fashion that accords with common sense, facilitates
commerce, contains costs and
secures public confidence in the
In other words, commercial agreements should be construed in their commercial
expanded construction of the phrase 'Principal's negligence' in cl 4.3 of
the policy extension seems to us to coincide with business
commonsense. There
is no discernible reason why the policy extension should only relate to
non‑delegable duties owed by the
Principal to a Worker, and not also cover
the liability of the Principal to pay damages to a Worker upon the basis of
vicarious liability.
In both situations, the Principal has a liability which
has been incurred through the operation of the Principal's business. It
inferred that the commercial purpose of the policy extension is to prevent the
business of a Principal from being exposed
to liabilities from work carried out
during the operation of that business. The precise jurisprudential basis for
the liability
is of little importance to a Principal.
these reasons, we would also have dismissed ground 2 of the appeal if we
had needed to finally determine it.
Appeal ground 3
the success of appeal ground 3 depends upon the success of both
grounds 1 and 2, we would dismiss this ground of appeal as
Cross‑Appeal
ground of cross‑appeal is in the following
The learned trial Judge erred in law in finding at Reasons for Decision [253]
and [264] that the appellant was not entitled to indemnity
for the costs of
defending the plaintiff's claim in that the indemnity provided by the
Principal's Indemnity extension was expressed
to be governed by the terms of the
contract of insurance as if the Principal were the employer of the injured
employee and that contract
provided the insured employer with indemnity for
legal costs incurred by the Principal.
significant reasoning by the trial judge is at
It seems to me that properly construed, cl 7 of the Principal's Extension
does not pick up any part of cl 8 of the Insurance Policy.
As neither the
Insurance Policy, nor the Principal's Extension otherwise required GIO to
indemnify [PICS] for its legal costs of
defending Mr Fussell's claim, GIO
is not obliged to indemnify [PICS] for those costs.
cl 8 to which the trial judge referred was in these terms (the 'you' being
earlier defined so as to be taken to be a reference
incur Common Law Liability for an Injury during the Policy Period;
injured Worker is entitled to recover from you in respect of the injury; both
workers' compensation under the Act and Damages
at common law ...; and
are entitled to indemnity from us under this Policy for that workers'
compensation liability (or would be so entitled if a claim
were made).
then we will indemnify you against
any Damages you are liable to pay, and reasonable legal costs you incur with our
written consent,
for the Common Law Liability subject to the policy limit of the
Common Law Insurance and the Exclusions and Conditions of this Policy.
Notwithstanding
that junior counsel for PICS developed attractive submissions that the
conclusion reached by the trial judge was
incorrect, we do not accept that the
trial judge was wrong. Ultimately, the clause in the extension which defines
the extent of
the indemnity for
the purposes of the
extension is cl 4. This confines the indemnity obligation to the 'Common
Law Liability'. It does not extend
to the legal costs incurred by the
our view, no amount of sophisticated analysis of cl 7 of the extension can
collaterally outflank the operation of cl 4 which plainly
states the extent
of the indemnity obligation. The extent of that obligation is the most
fundamental aspect of the extension. We
do not think that this important aspect
of the indemnity obligation can be modified or extended by a sidewind, based
upon an appeal
to the need to harmoniously read various provisions of the policy
and the extension.
these reasons we would dismiss both the appeal and the
cross‑appeal.
have the considerable advantage of having read Thomson P and
Bond AJA's joint reasons for decision in draft. I agree with
P and Bond AJA, for the reasons that their Honours give, that
appeal ground 1 fails. It follows that the appeal must be dismissed.
circumstances where the counterparty to the insurance policy was not joined to
the primary proceedings, and has not been heard
on the constructional question
at the heart of appeal ground 2, I would not decide that ground or make any
observations in relation
to the question that it raises.
is, however, necessary to decide the constructional question that underpins the
cross‑appeal.
substance the cross‑appeal raises another constructional question as to
the scope of the indemnity provided by the Principal's
Extension. This is
whether, properly construed, the Principal's Extension has the effect that PICS
is entitled to an indemnity against
the costs of defending the plaintiff's
claim. PICS contends for such a construction. In that respect PICS relies on
cl 7 of the
Principal's Extension (see [22] above). PICS argues that
this picks up cl 8 of the main policy (see [72] above). In its terms
8 provides for an indemnity in favour of WorkPac (and other named
insureds) rather than a Principal such as PICS. The indemnity
the main policy is an
indemnity as to both 'Damages' and
'reasonable legal costs you incur with our written consent'.
have been many recent decisions in this court outlining the general principles
for the construction of commercial instruments.
For present purposes it
suffices to incorporate, without repetition, the principles and authorities
summarised in
Nickel Ltd (in liquidation) (receivers and managers appointed) v Mining
Standards International Pty
Relevantly, the starting point for the proper construction of a contractual
clause is the language used in the clause. There must
be identification of the
possible meaning that the words used can bear.
the critical provision is the indemnity in cl 4 of the Principal's
Extension. This provides for an indemnity against
'that' Common Law Liability.
The 'that' refers to obligation mentioned in cl 4.3 of the Principal's
Extension, namely, an obligation
whereby the Principal is 'liable to pay
, or to contribute to an award
' (emphasis added). This
focus on damages is consistent with the definition of Common Law Liability in
the main policy wording (see
[61] above).
contended for construction, as advanced by its cross‑appeal, is not open
on the text of cl 4 of the Principal's Extension.
Clause 4 provides
for an indemnity as to
it does not provide for an indemnity against the
of defending a claim.
scope of the indemnity in cl 4 of the Principal's Extension is not expanded
by cl 7. Nor, read and construed in context having
due regard to the
evident purpose of the Principal's Extension and the insurance contract as a
whole, does cl 7 of the Principal's
Extension pick up cl 8 of the main
policy wording. Clause 7 of the Principal's Extension limits the indemnity
in cl 4; it does not
extend the indemnity in cl 4. The primary judge
identified three reasons why PICS's contention to the contrary ought to be
Reasons [247] - [252]. I agree with this aspect of the
primary judge's reasons. The primary judge was correct, for the reasons
his Honour gave, to conclude that, properly construed, cl 7 of the
Principal's Extension does not pick up any part of cl 8 of
the main policy
these reasons the Principal's Extension does not entitle PICS to an indemnity
against the costs of defending the plaintiff's
claim. The cross‑appeal
Accordingly,
I, like Thomson P and Bond AJA, would dismiss the appeal and the
cross‑appeal. The parties should be heard on
the question of costs in
this court. Prima facie the appellant should pay the first respondent's costs
of the appeal; and the first
respondent should pay the appellant's costs of the
cross‑appeal.
certify that the preceding paragraph(s) comprise the reasons for decision of the
Supreme Court of Western Australia.
Associate to the Hon President
17 OCTOBER 2025
Fussell v Pilbara Iron
Company (Services) Pty Ltd
[2024] WADC 72
) [3], [13].
[11] ‑ [24].
[23] ‑ [24].
Reasons [16],
[17] ‑ [18].
Transcript,
Pilbara Iron Company (Services) Pty Ltd
[2024] WADC 72
Court of Western Australia, 30 April 2024, 461 ‑ 462
[11] ‑ [24].
[41] ‑ [44].
Reasons [104] ‑ [105]. See GAB 142 ‑ 143.
BAB 2 (Orders made by Palmer J, 30 August 2024,
WAB 1 (Amended Appeal Notice
WAB 4 (Notice of Second Respondent's
Intention).
WAB 8 (Appellant's Case, Appellant's Grounds of Appeal, Appeal ground
WAB 9 (Appellant's case, Appellant's Grounds of Appeal, Appeal ground
WAB 9 (Appellant's case, Appellant's Grounds of Appeal, Appeal ground
Reasons [253],
WAB 15 ‑ 16 (Appellant's Case, Appellant's Submissions
Sappideen et al,
Fleming's The Law of
ed, Lawbook Co,
GAB 42, 117 ‑ 118,
Lightfoot v Rockingham
Wild Encounters Pty Ltd
[57], approved in
Corbett v Town of Port
[2024] WASCA 9
Taylor v Fisher
[2018] WASCA 126
Reasons [71]; GAB
Mr Ricky Lee (who was Mr Fussell's supervisor), Jody Shadwick
(Reviewer) and Raleigh Jordan
(Approver).
GAB 12 (Item
[98] ‑ [99].
WAB 9 (Appellant's Case, Appellant's Grounds of Appeal.
Bird v DP (a
[2024] HCA 41
(2024) 98 ALJR 1349
CCIG Investments
Pty Ltd v Schokman
[2023] HCA 21
(2023) 278 CLR 165
[49] ‑ [53], [65], [70] ‑ [75].
Explorations NL v Blake Dawson Waldron (A
[2010] WASC 97
[53] ‑ [148].
Ts 42. See also ts
Although it appears to have been conceded that the business was broader than
just gold mining and included iron ore mining: Trial
Manren Ltd v Royal &
Sun Alliance Insurance Australia Ltd
[2003] VSCA 59
(2003) 12 ANZ
Insurance Cases 61-568
; [12]. See also
National Roads &
Motorists' Association Ltd v Whitlam
[2007] NSWCA 81
(2007) 25 ACLC 688
Agricultural and Rural
Finance Pty Ltd v Gardiner
[2008] HCA 57
; (2008) 238 CLR 570 [38], [116];
Movie Network Channels Pty
Ltd v Optus Vision Pty Ltd
[2010] NSWCA 111
[71] ‑ [73];
Electricity Generation
Corp trading as Verve Energy v Woodside Energy Ltd
[2014] HCA 7
251 CLR 640
Multi-Link Leisure
Developments Ltd v North Lanarkshire Council
[2010] UKSC 47
WAB 80 (First Respondent's Grounds of Appeal in Cross‑Appeal).
Mirabela Nickel Ltd (in
liquidation) (receivers and managers appointed) v Mining Standards International
[2025] WASCA 82
[114] - [116].
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (5.28 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter