URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WASTR/2004/28.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:08:43
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Field & Anor and Dobson [2004] WASTR 28 (28 December 2004)
STRATA TITLES
: FIELD & ANOR AND DOBSON
[2004] WASTR 28
MR R J KRONBERGER, REFEREE
28 JUNE 2004
FILE NUMBER :
ST/2004-000032
STRATA PLAN
MAURICE JAMES GEORGE
JEAN MARGARET
GILLIAN MARGARET
Catchwords:
Real property
– Strata titles – use of common property – air-conditioner
Legislation:
Strata Titles Act
Two orders made, applications for three
Representation:
Applicant :
Respondent :
Solicitors:
Applicant :
Respondent :
referred to in judgment(s):
Cases(s) also
PRINCIPAL ORDER
1 The repair of common property and the siting of an air-conditioner on common
2 The Applicants are Maurice James George Field and Jean Margaret Field as the
proprietors of Lot 5 on Strata Plan 3505 ("the Strata
3 The Respondent is Gillian Margaret Dobson, as the proprietor of Lot 4 on the
Strata Plan.
Strata Plan and relevant
4 The Strata Plan was registered on 8 December 1975 pursuant to the
Titles Act 1966
("the 1966 Act").
5 In 1985, the 1966 Act was repealed and replaced by the
Strata Titles Act
") which continues to be the relevant Act.
6 In these Reasons, unless otherwise specified, all references to sections and
Schedules are, respectively, references to sections
of and Schedules to the
7 The parcel known as "Queenslea Close" is a brick and tile 7-lot residential
development at 12 Queenslea Drive Claremont which,
according to the Strata Plan,
is the address for service for notices on the Strata Company.
8 There are a number of buildings shown on the Strata Plan. The lots are
comprised in various parts of the buildings.
9 The Strata Plan contains a number of parts of the common property outlined in
broken areas, described variously as carport, porch
courtyard. Each is marked "for the use of" a specified lot. However, they are
surveyor's notations only and create no legal
Orders sought
10 The Applicants have sought orders under
in the following
"The proprietor of Unit 4 at 12 Queenslea Drive is
1. Repair the two open brickwork holes on the
south wall of Unit 4.
2. Complete the repair and painting of guttering around Unit 4.
3. Remove the air-conditioning unit fixed to the outside wall of Unit 5.
4. Remove air-conditioning unit from the west wall of Unit 4.
5. Stop leaving dustbin out on the common access pathway to Unit 3 and
11 The proprietor of Lot 4 is Gillian Margaret
12 When the Strata Plan was registered, the Strata Company's by-laws were the
"standard" by-laws in
and II of the Schedule
to the 1966 Act.
13 Notification G267390, recorded on the Strata Plan on 28 August 1996, records
the repeal of those by-laws and the adoption of
the "standard" by-laws and
Sch 1 and 2 to the
, together with a new Sch 1 by-law numbered
16, in relation to the
grant of exclusive use rights and special privileges in
of parts of the common property. I will refer to that by-law in more
detail below.
Lot boundaries
14 Pursuant to
sections 3(1)
and (2), each lot within the scheme is a cubic
space having as its boundaries the upper surface of
the floor, the inner
of the perimeter walls and the under surface of the ceiling
of the part of the respective building in which it is situated. Everything else
is common property.
Section 42(8)
, provides, in part, that
"A strata company may, with the consent in writing of the proprietor of a lot,
pursuant to a resolution without dissent ... make,
under this subsection only
and not otherwise, a by-law in respect of that lot conferring on that proprietor
the exclusive use and
enjoyment of, or special privileges of in respect of, the
common property or any part of it upon such terms and conditions (including
proper maintaining and keeping in a state of good and serviceable repair of the
common property or that part of the common property
as the case may be...) as
may be specified in the by-law..."
16 The new Sch 1, by-law 16, adopted in 1996 appears to have been a by-law
of the kind permitted by
"That subject to the reservation to the company and its agents at all reasonable
times on notice (except in case of emergency when
no notice shall be required)
to enter into and upon such portions of the common property for the purpose of
inspecting maintaining
or renewing parts wires cables and ducts for the
time-being therein, the proprietor or proprietors for the time-being of the lots
mentioned hereunder shall have and are hereby granted respectively the right to
exclusive use and enjoyment of those portions of
the common property described
hereunder and set opposite the lot number specified
hereunder..."
17 In relation to Lot 4, the by-law includes
"4. The portion of
the common property shown on the said plan annexed here to and thereon outlined
in yellow and marked EU4, except
for the Norfolk Island Pine Tree located where
marked with a cross in that exclusive use area."
18 Lot 4 comprises a residential portion and a separate small area, presumably
19 The residential portion of Lot 4 shares a common wall with the residential
portion of Lot 5.
20 In relation to Lot 5, the by-law
"5. The portion of the common property shown on the said plan annexed here to
and thereon outlined in pink and marked EU5 including
a swimming pool
21 There appear to be some problems in defining the precise parts of the common
property that are the subject of the Strata Company's
Sch 1, by-law 16, but
I understand that this issue is under review by the Strata
Applicants' submissions
22 The Applicants have advised me that:
"1. Unit owners agreed
to have gutters, downpipes and eaves repainted. The owner Unit 4 refused entry
to painters and has since not
completed the work despite assurances made to body
corporate council. All other unit owners complied with council decision to paint
and repair where needed.
Owners of Unit 4 carried out
renovation without reference to council. Large holes left in outside wall,
brickwork never repaired.
Owner of Unit 4
installed air-conditioner units to outside walls, one of which is the outside
wall of Unit 5. Owner was asked to remove
them and has
23 The Applicants have provided photographs in support of their
application.
24 An Extraordinary General Meeting of the Strata Company was held on 12
November 2003 ("the 2003 EGM"). The Minutes of that meeting
"The proprietor of Unit 4, Ms G. Dobson, advised that she had commenced painting
the external walls and undertook to repair or replace
any gutters or downpipes
to her unit as required. Ms Dobson confirmed that the works to her unit would be
completed by the end of
November 2003".
25 The Applicants report that those works were not even commenced by that date.
Although the painting has been carried out this
year, the Applicants contend
that it was not in the colour scheme agreed on at the 2003 EGM.
26 The gutters and downpipes are said to have been painted cream instead of
27 As to item 2, they claim that the holes in the brickwork were not there when
Ms Dobson purchased her Lot 4.
Responses to
application
28 One proprietor who has opposed the application has given no grounds for that
opposition.
29 The only other response has come from the Respondent. In opposing the
application she has advised that the two open brickwork
holes on the south wall
of Lot 4 have now been either covered or filled in.
30 She has also advised that the painting of Lot 4 was completed by 1 December
2003 in accordance with the Strata Company's resolution
of November 2003 and
that the guttering to the front second-storey portion was replaced on 31 March
2004, being the earliest date
that the Strata Company's guttering contractors
could do the work.
31 In relation to Orders 3 and 4, the Respondent has advised that
"The air-conditioning unit was installed on the understanding that it is fixed
within the exclusive use area of the external courtyard
air-conditioning unit on the west wall of Unit 4 was installed on the
understanding that the outer wall of the unit is the exclusive
use area of Unit
4 and no other approval was required from other unit owners. I understand that
this is the basis on which each unit
owner is required to be responsible for its
own gutters and external painting...Furthermore, this conclusion was reached as
other Units have external fixtures attached to the external walls and
32 She states that Unit 1 has two air-conditioning units on the south wall and
one air-conditioning unit on the north wall, that
Unit 2 has a hot water
system on south wall, that Unit 3 has an air-conditioning unit on the south wall
and skylights on the roof, Unit 5 has an air-conditioning
unit on the south
wall, wooden shutters on various windows and a solar hot water system on the
roof, Unit 6 has air-conditioning
units on the eastern west wall and Unit 7 may
have a building on the south-east corner of its rear courtyard. She
"It would appear that no formal approval has been granted in respect of any of
the above external fixtures as I have searched the
strata company's records from
the first Annual General Meeting held on 5 April 1976 ... There is no record of
any approval granted
to any other unit holder in respect of any external
33 In relation to the dustbin, she advises that it has not been left outside
their common access way to Units 3 and 4, although
she concedes that, at times,
it has been left outside the gate to the external courtyard of Unit 4 to enable
rubbish to be put in.
"The dustbin has not been left in that position for at least the last three
34 She adds that
"In respect of the application submitted by Mr and Mrs Field, I advise that
neither the strata company manager or myself were notified
of Mr and Mrs Field's
objection other than a verbal request to me from Mrs Field in the car park of
the units asking whether I would
remove the air-conditioning unit in my
exclusive use area. I responded that as it was in my exclusive use area I did
understand why
it should be removed. I then contacted the strata company manager
to enquire whether Mrs Field had contacted her in respect of the
air-conditioning unit. I was advised that no-one had contacted the strata
company manager in relation to the issue. The strata company
manager offered to
and did attend at Unit 4 the following week to view the air-conditioning units
and visited both Mrs Field and
the owner of Unit 3 to attempt to resolve the
situation. Neither were at home and the strata company manager left messages for
owners of units 3 and 5 to contact her if they wished to discuss the matter.
Neither the owner of unit 3 or unit 5 responded to the
strata company manager.
Nothing was heard in relation to the issue until I, as secretary, received the
documents received from the
Strata Titles Referee on 29 March 2004. ...
The strata title manager has not received any complaints from any other unit
owner in relation to the air-conditioning units fixed
to the walls of Unit 4 or
any other issues."
35 She also advises that she did not refuse entry to the painters but objected
to them entering her courtyard unannounced without
prior appointment or warning
at 7am one morning, despite the Strata Company having written to her advising
the painting process would
involve the painter contacting each owner to arrange
a meeting to discuss colours and related matters, but that this did not
Considerations
36 As to item 1 of the requested Orders, the Respondent's explanation appears
to be reasonable. That explanation has been put to
the Applicants and not
challenged by them.
37 I also note that, in relation to the paint colours referred to by the
Applicants, the Minutes of the 2003 EGM contain no reference
38 The Strata Company held its 2003 Annual General Meeting ("the 2003 AGM") on
19 March 2003.
39 The Minutes of the 2003 AGM include
"At the previous meeting the strata company had agreed that two owners choose
colours for acceptance of the other owners at a meeting.
A meeting of owners had
been convened during the year and as there was insufficient owners represented,
the meeting could not proceed
to business and therefore the motion was not able
to be passed.
The colours selected were Marino (Cream) and Blue (Farres). The meeting resolved
THAT the two colours as proposed be accepted
40 There was no specification as to which parts of the parcel were to be
painted cream and which parts were to be painted blue.
41 The Respondent's statement that the holes in the brickwork have been
repaired has not been disputed by the Applicants.
42 I accept the Respondent's statement that the rubbish bin issue no longer
exists. In any event, it is an issue well within the
powers of the Strata
Company to deal with.
43 In the circumstances, I believe that the only outstanding matter is the
positioning of the air conditioning units on "the outside
wall of Unit 5" and on
"the west wall of Unit 4".
44 Bearing in mind my power under
to express an Order in terms other
than sought by an applicant, so long as it does not
differ in substance from the
order sought,
I make the following orders.
1. The application for
requested Order 1 is dismissed.
The application for requested
Order 2 is dismissed.
The application for
requested Order 5 is dismissed.
extent that any air conditioning unit serving Lot 5 on Strata Plan 3505 ("the
Strata Plan") intrudes into any part of the common
property comprised in the
Strata Plan which is not subject to an exclusive use by-law granted in favour of
the proprietor of the
said Lot 5 pursuant to
Strata Titles
now or at any time prior to 30 September 2004, the proprietor of the
said Lot 5 must by that date remove that air conditioning unit
from that part of
the said common property, at that proprietor's risk and cost in all respects,
making good any damage caused by
the installation and removal of that air
conditioning unit; and
5. To the extent that any air
conditioning unit serving Lot 5 on the Strata Plan intrudes into Lot 4 on the
Strata Plan or into any
part of the common property comprised in the Strata Plan
which is subject to an exclusive use by-law granted in favour of the proprietor
of the said Lot 4 pursuant to
Strata Titles Act 1985
proprietor of the said Lot 5 must, by 30 September 2004, remove that air
conditioning unit from that part of the
said Lot 4 and from that part of the said common property, at that
proprietor's risk and cost in all respects, making good any damage
caused by the
installation and removal of that air conditioning unit.
DATED 28 June 2004
_________________________________
RJ KRONBERGER
STRATA TITLES REFEREE
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (62.5 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter