URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WASC/2025/463.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:07:54
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
WHYMARK NOMINEES PTY LTD -v- MITCHELL [No 2] [2025] WASC 463 (7 November 2025)
COURT OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
NOMINEES PTY LTD -v- MITCHELL [No 2]
[2025] WASC 463
SEPTEMBER 2025; WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS FILED 26 SEPTEMBER & 3 OCTOBER
DELIVERED :
NOVEMBER 2025
CIV 2074 of 2019
NOMINEES PTY LTD
(WA) PTY LTD
DEAN MITCHELL
and procedure - Plaintiffs' application for continuation of freezing order -
Defendant's application to vary undertakings
- Whether separate undertaking
ought be accepted in place of freezing order - Whether undertaking and/or
freezing order should be
varied to enable payment of defendant's legal costs -
Whether defendant has made sufficient disclosure of his assets - Whether
has discharged onus in relation to quantum of legal costs - Turns on
Legislation:
of the Supreme Court 1971
(WA) O 52A r
Undertakings
varied to allow payment of legal costs of $72,667.75
Representation:
R W Douglas
R W Douglas
J MacLaurin SC
Solicitors:
Couldwell Legal
Couldwell Legal
referred to in decision:
11 July 2025, the plaintiffs filed a chamber summons seeking an interlocutory
injunction and freezing orders in relation to the
net proceeds of the sale of a
property then owned by the defendant and his wife in Dunsborough (Dunsborough
Property). Specifically,
the plaintiffs sought orders for the defendant's
proportion of the proceeds of the sale to be paid into his solicitors' trust
pending final resolution of these proceedings. At that time, settlement
was scheduled for Monday 14 July 2025.
plaintiffs' application was listed before me on an urgent basis on 11 July
2025. Initially, the application was opposed by the
defendant. However, at the
hearing, counsel who appeared for the defendant proffered an undertaking to the
court to pay the defendant's
proportion of the proceeds of sale (Proceeds) into
his solicitors' trust account. Given this undertaking, orders were made to
the plaintiffs' application to a hearing on 6 August 2025 with
liberty to apply on four hours' notice.
formal undertaking was filed by the defendant's solicitors on 11 July 2025
shortly after the hearing, followed by the filing of
an undertaking personally
signed by the defendant on 17 July 2025 (Undertakings).
21 July 2025, the defendant filed a notice of change of representation in these
proceedings giving notice of his intention to
act in person. On being served
with this document, the plaintiffs' solicitors initially sought to relist the
application, pursuant
to the liberty to apply. Ultimately, following an exchange
of correspondence between the plaintiffs' solicitors and the former solicitors
for the defendant confirming the Undertakings remained in place, the plaintiffs
did not press for the application to be relisted
at that time.
8 August 2025, pursuant to the liberty to apply, the plaintiffs again sought to
relist the chamber summons on an urgent basis.
This was because the plaintiffs
had become aware the defendant had lodged an application to transfer his
interest in the family home
in East Fremantle (East Fremantle Property), which
is jointly owned by him and his wife. At that stage, it was not known to whom
the defendant proposed to transfer his interest. The plaintiffs subsequently
became aware that the defendant proposed to transfer
his interest in the East
Fremantle Property to his wife for no consideration.
chamber summons was relisted that afternoon and the defendant appeared by
telephone. At the hearing, a bundle of documents was
handed up to the court as
evidence of the matters relied upon and an undertaking was given by counsel for
the plaintiffs to file
these documents, to regularise matters. At the conclusion
of this hearing, orders were made under O 52A r 2 of the
Rules of the Supreme Court 1971
to restrain the defendant from granting or transferring any interest in the East
Fremantle Property until further order (Orders).
The plaintiffs' amended chamber
summons was otherwise adjourned for hearing until 20 August 2025. The
proposed transfer of the defendant's
interest in the East Fremantle Property has
not occurred as a consequence of the Orders.
11 August 2025, the defendant appointed new solicitors to act for him in these
proceedings. On 20 August 2025, orders were made
programming the
plaintiffs' application for a continuation of the Orders to a hearing on
23 September 2025. These orders required
the defendant to file any
materials in opposition to the application by 5 September 2025 and for the
plaintiffs to file any materials
in reply by 19 September 2025.
defendant did not comply with the programming orders. He filed his first
affidavit on 12 September 2025, with submissions filed
on 14 September
2025. His second affidavit was filed on 23 September 2025 in response to
certain matters raised by the plaintiffs
in their reply submissions. On the same
date, the defendant also filed two proposed undertakings. The first sought to
vary the Undertakings
to enable him to meet his legal costs of these proceedings
as well as the defence costs of separate criminal proceedings. The second
undertook not to deal with his legal or equitable interest in the East Fremantle
Property while these proceedings are ongoing.
the hearing on 23 September 2025, it became apparent that there were two
main issues in dispute between the parties. First, whether
the defendant had
adduced accurate and fulsome evidence of his asset position and the resources
available to him to fund his legal
costs without recourse to the Proceeds or his
interest in the East Fremantle Property. Second, in the event the court was
the defendant's only assets were the Proceeds and his interest in the
East Fremantle Property, what orders should be made to enable
the defendant to
meet his legal costs.
plaintiffs did not accept that the Proceeds and the East Fremantle Property were
the defendant's only significant assets. In
support of this submission, counsel
for the plaintiffs handed up a transfer document obtained from Landgate in
relation to Lizabella
Pty Ltd (Lizabella), a company of which the defendant and
his wife are directors and
shareholders.
Counsel for the plaintiffs submitted this document evidenced the receipt of
significant funds by a related party of the defendant
in May 2024, which
had not been the subject of evidence or disclosure in the defendant's affidavits
filed in opposition to the application.
Approximately
one hour's notice was given to the defendant's solicitors of the plaintiffs'
intention to seek to rely on this document.
In circumstances where the defendant
had not had any opportunity to respond, I made orders enabling the defendant to
file further
evidence and submissions to address this matter and for the
plaintiffs to file further evidence and submissions in response.
my view, the manner in which the plaintiffs' solicitors and counsel have
approached this application is unorthodox. While the
court understands it is not
always possible, in matters of urgency, for evidence to be adduced by way of
affidavit filed prior to
a hearing, I am not satisfied that urgency was a
sufficient explanation for the failure to adduce this evidence on affidavit. The
document handed up to the court at the hearing was obtained at 11.08 am,
more than three hours' prior to the hearing at 2.15 pm.
There was, in my
view, sufficient time for the document to be annexed to an affidavit, which
could then have been filed and served
on the defendant. The plaintiffs' failure
to do so, as well as their failure to give sufficient notice to the defendant of
intention to refer to this document, led to further material being filed
by both parties and additional time being spent by the court
in addressing this
application.
the reasons which follow, it is my view that the Undertakings should be varied
to enable the payment from the Proceeds of the
reasonable legal costs of the
defendant in both these proceedings and the criminal proceedings. There is,
however, insufficient evidence
as to the basis on which the defendant has
estimated that his costs of defending both proceedings will be more than
$300,000 or the
timeframe over which these costs will be incurred. At this
stage, I consider that the Undertakings should be varied to enable the
of legal costs of $72,667.75 from the funds held on trust by the defendant's
former solicitors. If any further variation
is sought, it will be necessary for
the defendant to adduce evidence as to the basis for any costs estimates and the
timeframe over
which these costs will be incurred.
Summary of plaintiffs' claims
is apparent from the date these proceedings were commenced (20 June 2019)
and the above summary of the current applications, these
proceedings have a long
and somewhat complex history. Much of this history is not relevant to the
application before me today.
first plaintiff's claim arises in relation to a vessel known as 'Satisfaction'
(Vessel) which the first plaintiff agreed to purchase
from Australian Civils Pty
Ltd (Civils), a company of which the defendant was the sole director. The first
plaintiff seeks an order
for payment of (or damages equivalent to) the costs of
transferring the registration of the Vessel to the first plaintiff as well
for the indemnity costs of these proceedings. On 28 February 2020, Acting
Master Whitby (as her Honour then was) ordered that
the defendant (and Civils,
the then first defendant in these proceedings) pay the plaintiffs' costs of the
proceedings to date as
well as the costs associated with the transfer of the
registration of the Vessel, to be taxed if not agreed, including the costs
applications.
The application for special costs orders as against Civils (but not the
defendant) was reserved to the trial
The first plaintiff contends the defendant is liable for these amounts on the
basis of representations said to be misleading and
deceptive contrary to
s 18 of the Australian Consumer Law (being sch 2 to the
Competition and Consumer Act 2010
(Cth)) (ACL).
second plaintiff's claim arises from the sale of a business by the first
plaintiff to Viewtop Holdings Pty Ltd (Viewtop) (a now
deregistered company of
which the defendant was the sole director and shareholder). Prior to settlement
of the sale of the business,
the second plaintiff agreed to provide Viewtop with
a facility of approximately $370,000 for working capital.
documents, guarantees by the defendant, and a mortgage over the Dunsborough
Property were requested and documents in respect
of the first advance of
$250,000 were prepared. The plaintiffs say the defendant's solicitors provided
comments on both the loan
agreement and general security agreement, but not the
Ultimately,
only the loan agreement was executed by the parties. The guarantee was dated by
the defendant but not signed. No mortgage
over the Dunsborough Property has ever
been provided (either signed or unsigned). When the documents were provided by
the defendant
to Jeffery Hall, the plaintiffs plead that the defendant said
words to the effect '
Here are the signed documents
you asked for'. Mr Hall did not go through these documents at that time.
Shortly after receipt of these
documents, the second plaintiff advanced $250,000
to Viewtop.
6 July 2018, a second set of documents were prepared by the plaintiffs'
solicitors in relation to the additional loan of $120,000.
The loan and general
security agreement were executed by the defendant on behalf of Viewtop. When the
documents were provided by
the defendant to Mr Hall, the plaintiffs plead
that the defendant again said words to the effect 'Here are the signed documents
asked for'. Mr Hall did not go through these documents at that time.
Again, the bundle did not include an executed guarantee or mortgage.
after receipt of these documents, the second plaintiff advanced $120,000 to
second plaintiff says that as a consequence of these matters, it has an
equitable mortgage over the Dunsborough Property.
the alternative to this claim, the second plaintiff says the defendant's conduct
was misleading and deceptive, in contravention
of the ACL.
plaintiffs say that, as at 31 August 2025, the quantum of their claim
against the defendant is not less than $1.5 million. This
comprises the
(a) costs associated with the sale of the Vessel - $77,520;
(b) enforcement costs (on an indemnity basis) - $54,281.68;
(c) interest on these amounts - $55,009.23;
(d) the loans advanced by the second plaintiff - $370,000;
(e) contractual interest of 8% (compounded monthly) ‑ $654,790.14;
(f) legal costs of these proceedings to date - $150,000;
(g) an indemnity uplift - $99,000; and
(h) interest on these costs - $44,860.93.
Should there be any variation to the Undertakings?
was broad agreement between the parties as to the general principles that apply
to this application, namely:
(a) the purpose of a freezing order is not to secure priority for the plaintiff,
to prevent a defendant from paying their debts,
or to stop a defendant from
spending their own money. The purpose is to prevent the defendant transferring
assets and thereby frustrating
(b) a court can vary an undertaking given by a party in lieu of an injunction,
if that party establishes by evidence that the interests
of justice require the
amendment to avoid the undertaking being
(c) in determining whether the proposed variation should be made, the defendant
is required to satisfy the court that the money is
required for a purpose which
does not conflict with the policy underlying the freezing order. It also
requires a party to demonstrate
that there are no other assets to which resort
might be had to pay legal costs and that the proposed expenditure is
reasonable.
What assets are available to the defendant to meet his
legal expenses?
defendant's evidence is that he received an amount of $331,928.82 from the
proceeds of the sale of the Dunsborough
His only other substantial asset is his 'half interest' in the East Fremantle
There is a Property (Seizure and Sale) Order lodged against the East Fremantle
Property's title, although there is no information
as to the extent of this
encumbrance. Apart from these assets, the defendant says that his income and
assets are limited. Until 21
August 2025, he was working as a consultant on
a day rate of $1,800 but since that time has not found any alternative
'other than sporadic short-term
engagements'.
defendant and his wife have two bank accounts. The majority of the balance of
these accounts is the proceeds of his wife's portion
of the sale of the
Dunsborough
his first affidavit filed on 12 September 2025, the defendant explained
that he had identified the assets that have 'realistic
and practical value' in
relation to the payment of his legal costs. He accepted that he had general
chattels, such as household
but did not own any 'vehicles, shares, or any other valuable
In his second affidavit filed on 23 September 2025, the defendant clarified
that while he owns some shares, they do not have value
(or any market). The
shares owned by him are in very small corporate entities which, with one
exception, are all
his third affidavit filed on 26 September 2025, the defendant addressed the
Landgate transfer form that was handed up by counsel
for the plaintiffs during
the hearing. This transfer form shows that a property owned by Lizabella was
sold on 28 August 2024 for
$3.025 million. The property that was the
subject of this transfer was provided to the National Australia Bank (NAB) as
for loans for the purchase of the Whymark
The defendant's evidence is that the vast majority of these funds were used to
discharge liabilities to NAB and that he and his wife
received only $73,240.58
in proceeds, which was paid into their bank account. His evidence is that
Lizabella and its associated trust
are dormant and have no significant
defendant deposes that he is required to pay significant legal fees to defend
both these proceedings and the criminal proceedings
and that his legal costs are
likely to be in the order of $20,000 - $25,000 a month for the next six to
His evidence is that these costs can only be satisfied by accessing the Proceeds
together with any remuneration he receives from
any work undertaken by him. This
is because he cannot 'refinance the [East Fremantle Property] to produce funds
to pay legal fees
as [his] current position of facing a criminal prosecution
makes acquiring any finance at this time
impossible'.
only evidence that has been adduced of the defendant's costs of these
proceedings is that the costs to a full trial, including
counsel fees, are
likely to be in the order of
relation to the criminal proceedings, a copy of a letter from the defendant's
solicitors was adduced in evidence. This letter
states that the defendant
currently owes his solicitors (including for counsel fees) an amount of
$52,667.75 and that it was anticipated
there would be further costs of $9,735
for a one-day hearing on 25 July 2025. At present, the trial has not been
listed, but it is
anticipated there will be a 10-day jury trial with fees of
approximately
plaintiffs do not accept this evidence discharges the defendant's onus of
establishing he has no other assets from which to meet
his expenses. In relation
to the sale of the property by Lizabella, the plaintiffs say that it is
incorrect for the defendant to
assert that Lizabella has no assets. The
plaintiffs say that Lizabella has a right of indemnity against the defendant,
and Viewtop, having discharged their liabilities to NAB.
I accept that the plaintiffs' analysis of Lizabella's position is legally
correct, in my view, the submission has an air of
unreality. The contention that
Lizabella's right of indemnity over the assets of the defendant and
Mrs Mitchell (which include the
Proceeds and the East Fremantle Property)
is a valuable asset does not take account of the fact that any amount deducted
assets to reflect the value of Lizabella's right of indemnity will
necessarily reduce the defendant's assets available to him to
pay his legal
the evidence before me, I accept that the defendant has only two significant
assets, namely the Proceeds and his interest in the
East Fremantle Property. I
also accept that the defendant is unable to pay the costs of these proceedings
without recourse to one
of these assets.
primary question is which of the Undertakings or Orders should be varied to
enable these payments to be made.
Should orders be made to enable the defendant to meet
his legal costs from the Proceeds or the East Fremantle Property?
for the plaintiffs accepted that where an order is made freezing the entirety of
the assets of a defendant, it is usual for
the court to make orders enabling the
defendant to meet living expenses and legal costs. Initially, the plaintiffs
denied it was
necessary to make any orders of this nature as the Undertakings
and Orders did not freeze all of the defendant's
again, while I accept this is technically correct, as I set out above, the
Undertakings and Orders froze the Proceeds and the
East Fremantle Property,
which are the majority of the defendant's assets. I accept and find that the
defendant does not have the
resources or income to pay the legal fees of his
defence of these proceedings or the criminal proceedings, unless an order is
by the court to vary the Undertakings or Orders. The question is which
should be varied.
for the plaintiffs submitted that if any order varying the Undertakings or
Orders was to be made, the court should enable
the necessary funds to be raised
against the East Fremantle Property. This was because, in their submission, the
plaintiffs had a
proprietary claim in relation to the Proceeds, and no such
claim arose in relation to the East Fremantle Property. It was, however,
accepted that if the court was not satisfied there was a proprietary claim over
the Proceeds, these funds were the 'most convenient
source' from which these
costs could be
contention that the plaintiffs have a proprietary claim over the Proceeds arises
from the second plaintiff's claim that it had
an equitable mortgage over the
Dunsborough Property, which is maintained over the Proceeds. The basis for this
contention is set
out at [57] - [72] of the Third Amended Statement of
Claim filed 27 March 2024 (statement of claim) and summarised above. These
are, in essence, verified by an affidavit of Mr Hall filed
4 November 2021 (Hall Affidavit).
An equitable
mortgage will arise where there is a specifically enforceable agreement between
a mortgagor and a mortgagee to create
a mortgage. It is sufficient if there is a
binding promise that the defendant would provide the plaintiffs with an executed
over the Property that is capable of
registration.
this case, the plaintiffs plead a series of alternative matters to support the
contention that there is a specifically enforceable
agreement for the defendant
to provide a mortgage over the Property.
first is an oral agreement between Mr Hall and the defendant as pleaded in
[60] of the statement of claim. The agreement is pleaded
in a conclusory form
and is also said to be an agreement in principle. Little additional detail of
this agreement is contained in
the Hall Affidavit. Given the reference in the
pleading to this agreement being an agreement in principle, I do not consider
is a sufficient likelihood of success at trial that this oral agreement is
specifically enforceable that would justify the preservation
of the Proceeds in
their entirety pending trial.
next basis on which it is contended there is an equitable mortgage relies on the
bundle of documents provided by the defendant
to Mr Hall prior to the funds
being advanced by the second plaintiff. These documents included a loan
agreement between the second
plaintiff and
This agreement provides in par 2 of the schedule that the initial security
would be a mortgage over the Dunsborough Property. However,
at that time,
Viewtop did not have any interest in the Dunsborough Property and was not
capable of granting a mortgage over the Dunsborough
Property. The guarantee that
was dated (but not executed by the defendant) does not include any specific
requirement for the provision
of a mortgage over the Dunsborough
observations can be made about the documents provided by the plaintiffs to the
defendant and Viewtop on 6 July
The general security agreement that was executed on that date was between the
second plaintiff and Viewtop. This agreement also provided
that the initial
security would be a mortgage over the Dunsborough Property, although Viewtop did
not have any interest in the Dunsborough
Property at that stage. There is no
suggestion that the defendant ever provided a copy of a mortgage to the second
plaintiff or its
solicitors.
claims, however, are not the only claim made by second plaintiff in relation to
the provision of finance. The second plaintiff
also says the defendant's conduct
was misleading and deceptive, contrary to the provisions of s 18 of the
ACL. On the evidence before
me, I consider there is a serious question to be
tried as to whether the defendant's conduct in saying 'Here are the signed
you asked for' at the time he handed over the documents, if
Mr Hall's evidence is accepted at trial, was misleading and deceptive.
that time, the second plaintiff had requested both a guarantee from the
defendant as well as a mortgage over the Dunsborough Property;
Mr Hall had
not been told these documents would not be provided. However, even if the second
plaintiff succeeds in establishing this
claim, it does not give rise to any
claim over the Dunsborough Property; it is a claim for damages.
the basis of the evidence currently before me, I do not consider that there is a
sufficient likelihood that the second plaintiff
will succeed in establishing it
had an equitable mortgage over the Dunsborough Property that would justify a
continuation of the
Undertakings on the basis that the plaintiffs have a
proprietary claim over the Proceeds.
is no evidence before me of the value of the East Fremantle Property or whether
it would be possible to obtain a loan secured
by a mortgage over the defendant's
interest in the East Fremantle Property. The defendant's evidence that this is
not possible is
in the most general terms and does not suggest that any attempt
has been made to obtain finance. I place no weight on this evidence.
the circumstances of this case, I consider that the Proceeds are the most
convenient source from which the defendant's legal costs
can be paid.
said, at present, I do not consider there is sufficient evidence about what the
defendant's legal costs are likely to be or
how the monthly estimate of $20,000
- $25,000 has been calculated.
the evidence before me, I accept and find that the defendant has currently
incurred fees of $52,667.75 in defending the criminal
proceedings. I also accept
that an allowance should be made for the costs of these proceedings. Only a
broad estimate of these costs
is in evidence without any indication as to how
this estimate has been calculated or when these costs will be incurred. Without
evidence of these costs, I consider an initial amount of $20,000
should be made for the costs of defending these proceedings. I accept
allowance is unlikely to be sufficient for the payment of the defendant's
reasonable costs of defending these proceedings until
their conclusion. However,
consistent with the principles that I have summarised above, in order to vary
the Undertakings, it is
necessary for the defendant to establish that the
proposed expenditure is reasonable. I do not consider the evidence of the
has done so.
final issue for resolution is whether the Orders should be replaced by the
undertaking that has been proffered by the defendant.
In the circumstances of
this case, for two primary reasons, I do not accept this should occur.
the undertaking does not mirror the terms to the Orders, nor has the copy filed
with the court been signed by the defendant.
The court is not prepared to
discharge the Orders without receipt of a signed undertaking from the
the title of the East Fremantle Property states that it is owned by the
defendant and his wife as joint tenants. Given this,
it is incorrect to assert
that the defendant has any separate legal or equitable interest in this
That said, it is at least arguable that the conduct of the defendant in seeking
to transfer his interest in the East Fremantle Property
to his wife (the other
joint tenant) evidenced a common intention by them to sever the joint tenancy.
This was not the subject of
argument before me at the hearing and, accordingly,
it is not appropriate for me to reach any view on this matter. While the
and his wife remain joint tenants, there is a real question as to
whether the undertaking proffered by the defendant is sufficient
to protect the
plaintiffs against the risk which justified the granting of the
these reasons, I have concluded that the Undertakings should be varied to enable
the defendant to pay his reasonable legal costs
in defending both these
proceedings and the criminal proceedings.
present, there is insufficient evidence as to how the estimate of costs in
excess of $300,000 has been calculated or the timeframe
over which these costs
may be incurred. If these estimates are accurate, these costs will absorb almost
the entirety of the Proceeds.
this stage, I consider that the Undertakings should be varied to enable the
payment of legal costs of $72,667.75 from the funds
held on trust by the
defendant's former solicitors. This will enable payment of the defendant's
existing obligations to his solicitors
in the criminal proceedings and allow for
costs of $20,000 to be paid in these proceedings. If the defendant wishes to
order to further vary the Undertakings, this will need to be supported
by detailed evidence that sets out the basis for the estimate
and when these
costs are likely to be incurred.
I note that these proceedings were commenced in June 2019. At present, more
than 200 documents have been filed without the
matter having been entered
for trial. This has inevitably led to the incurring of significant costs by the
parties as well as a disproportionate
use of court resources. With this
application now having been heard and determined, the parties should focus their
attention on progressing
this matter to trial as quickly as
certify that the preceding paragraph(s) comprise the reasons for decision of the
Supreme Court of Western Australia.
Associate to the Honourable
Justice Hill
7 NOVEMBER 2025
Affidavit of Jeffery Mark Hall filed 23 September 2025, 'JMH-129'.
Nominees Pty Ltd v Australian Civils Pty Ltd
[2020] WASC
Order 4, Orders of Acting Master Whitby dated 28 February 2020.
Affidavit of Jeffery Mark Hall filed 23 September 2025, 'JMH-135'.
(Underwriting Agencies) Ltd v Dixon
[1983] 2 All ER
Wheel Pty Ltd v Wulff
[2018] WASC 180
& Co Pty Ltd v Laprese
[2019] VSC 56
(2019) 58 VR 155
(a pseudonym) v Independent Broad-Based Anti-Corruption
[2021] VSCA
(2021) 64 VR 270
Ltd v Harris [No 2]
[2011] WASC 104
Affidavit of Jeffery Mark Hall filed 23 September 2025, 'JMH-131'. The balance
of the trust account also includes an amount transferred
from a client account
of the defendant and is
$332,085.07.
The East Fremantle Property is owned by the defendant and his wife as joint
tenants: Affidavit of Jeffery Mark Hall filed 23 September
2025, 'JMH-118';
Exhibit A (from hearing on 8 August 2025), page 6.
Affidavit of Andrew Dean Mitchell filed 12 September 2025 [25].
Affidavit of Andrew Dean Mitchell filed 12 September 2025 [23] -
Affidavit of Andrew Dean Mitchell filed 12 September 2025 [22].
Affidavit of Andrew Dean Mitchell filed 12 September 2025 [30].
Affidavit of Andrew Dean Mitchell filed 23 September 2025 [12].
Affidavit of Andrew Dean Mitchell filed 26 September 2025 [9].
Affidavit of Andrew Dean Mitchell filed 12 September 2025 [38].
Affidavit of Andrew Dean Mitchell filed 12 September 2025 [33].
Affidavit of Andrew Dean Mitchell filed 12 September 2025 [37].
Affidavit of Andrew Dean Mitchell filed 12 September 2025 [36],
Holdings Inc v Wave Vistas Pty
[2005] HCA 13
(2005) 79 ALJR 825
, 837 [68];
Australia Bank Ltd v Clowes
[2013] NSWCA 179
Affidavit of Jeffery Mark Hall filed 4 November 2021, 'JMH-31'.
Affidavit of Jeffery Mark Hall
filed 4 November 2021, 'JMH-32'.
of Jeffery Mark Hall filed 4 November 2021, 'JMH-33' - 'JMH-35'.
Edgeworth B,
ed) [1404].
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (235 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter