URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WADC/2025/64.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:02:49
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
FARRUGIA -v- BHP BILLITON PETROLEUM PTY LTD [2025] WADC 64 (24 September 2025)
DISTRICT COURT OF WESTERN
IN CHAMBERS
FARRUGIA -v- BHP BILLITON PETROLEUM PTY LTD
[2025] WADC
DEPUTY REGISTRAR HARMAN
30 JULY & 21 AUGUST 2025
DELIVERED :
24 SEPTEMBER 2025
FILE NO/S :
CIV 714 of 2016
DENNIS FARRUGIA
BHP BILLITON PETROLEUM PTY LTD
First Defendant
TECHNIPFMC Pty Ltd
Second Defendant
Practice - Western Australia - Practice under
Rules of the Supreme Court 1971
(WA) - Application to strike out
parts of a pleading - Turns on its fact
Legislation:
Occupiers' Liability Act 1985
Petroleum Pipelines (Environment) Regulations 2012
Petroleum Pipelines Act 1969
Parts of the amended substituted statement of claim
are struck out
Representation:
Mr R Richter KC (only appeared on 21 August 2025) and Mr J N D'Angelo
First Defendant
Mr T C Russell SC
Second Defendant
Mr S D Hubbard (only appeared on 21 August 2025)
Solicitors:
Portfolio Law
First Defendant
HWL Ebsworth
Second Defendant
Case(s) referred to in decision(s):
REGISTRAR HARMAN
claims that are put against each defendant are for breach of duty
of care and breach of the
Occupiers' Liability Act 1985
claims are commonplace. The content of the amended substituted statement of
claim does not suggest that the task of pleading
would present any difficulty.
to what would be expected, the document is 52 pages in length.
benchmark attributed to is that a statement of claim should be no more than
two pages. By its written submissions the applicant
has produced a fair
illustration of what might be achieved by the plaintiff in one.
an overview, the length of the document is due to presentation of information
and submissions; to a narrative style; to lack of
precision of expression;
to incorporation of terminology and text from the
Petroleum Pipelines
Pipelines (Environment)
Regulations 2012
(WA); and irrelevant material.
the amended substituted statement of claim the plaintiff refers to what he
characterises as
Occupational Safety and Health Regulations 1996
Such references are to the content of sch 1 of the
Petroleum Pipelines
. The clauses of that schedule relate to occupational safety and
first defendant has applied to strike out some of the material from the
by the time that it applied, time to do so had expired, the applicant
requires a grant of leave. It approaches the task by applying
to extend the
time for bringing the substantive application.
the need for leave has been generated by the lapse
of time, an exercise of discretion in favour of the applicant
informed by the circumstances presented upon hearing
the substantive application. To be specific, the content of the
document, the
evidence, the rules, practice and the submissions.
rules did not emerge simply as a good idea, but rather in response to
decades of contest. They establish a responsibility to
straightforward allegations of material fact. In the case
of a statement of claim; the allegations by which the plaintiff
engage the relief available for a particular cause of action. Regardless of
whether its content might inform a defendant of
features of the case put against
it, service of a poorly pleaded claim burdens the task of responding.
recent times by commentary it has been suggested that rather than applying to
strike out content of a pleading, parties should
proceed with litigation as it
unfolds as best they can.
standards will not long endure unless the rules in which they are reflected are
enforced, it is inevitable that the naivety
of that approach will be
increasingly exposed.
ground upon which the first defendant relies for striking out particular
paragraphs is that their content may prejudice, embarrass
or delay the
fair trial of the action.
courts have regarded the phrase 'prejudice, embarrass or delay' as a
singular reason for intervention, the overview generates
reason to focus on the
meaning of the word 'embarrass' where it is used in the context of regulating
the pleading process. It is
to weigh down, impede, complicate or to
claim under the
Occupiers' Liability Act
depends upon an allegation
that at the material time the defendant was the occupier of premises upon
which the plaintiff was present.
claim founded upon a duty of care depends upon a connection between the
plaintiff and the defendant sufficient to establish the
duty for which the
plaintiff contends. In this instance, it is that the plaintiff was working or
present at premises for which the
applicant had responsibility, controlled,
managed or was an occupier.
illustration of the lack of precision in putting allegations of material
fact is that the plaintiff has complicated specification
of the premises.
Ultimately he provides scope for the reader to draw inferences.
states that at the material time he worked at the onshore plant
of the Macedon Gas Project. He defines that plant as his worksite.
By par 5d. he states that the Macedon Gas Project is the pipeline that
connects two facilities, one of which is an onshore gas treatment
compression plant. According to par 5d., that connection is a subsea
pipeline. By par 3b. the plaintiff indicates that the
Macedon Gas Project
includes the onshore pipelines.
onshore pipelines are not specified.
the onshore plant of the subsea pipeline may be is unclear.
the document there are other references to pipelines by which the plaintiff
would engage the Act and Regulations. The
plaintiff does not allege that
either the Act or the Regulations apply to either the Macedon Gas Project
or to the worksite. He
refers to a pipeline licence issued to the
applicant, but he does not allege that it applies to either the Macedon Gas
the worksite. He does not allege that the worksite was within the
licence area specified by the licence.
is no more than open to the reader to infer that the worksite was
the onshore gas treatment and compression plant; that the Act
Regulations apply to the worksite; and that the licence relates to the worksite.
The same can be said for 'the premises' on the
it is substituted for 'the worksite' in this paragraph.
claims put against the applicant emerge from the plaintiff's exposure to both
dust and water. His exposure to water during the
course of his employment
either coincided with or followed upon it being drawn by him from ponds.
is no allegation that the ponds were located at the premises, however the
content of par 46, by which he states that at the
Macedon Gas
Project premises the reverse osmosis water was contained in two ponds, provides
scope to infer that they were.
the extent that dispersing water accounted for the plaintiff's relevant
exposure, by par 56, he refers to 'plate of the premises',
'plate site
of the premises' and 'construction plate of the premises'.
of those terms are either defined or attributed any significance other than by
reference to water that the plaintiff had been
instructed to either
disperse or not disperse for the purpose of dust suppression.
is no allegation that the applicant had so instructed the plaintiff.
reference to the terms 'construction plate' and 'construction plate of the
premises', there is no clear allegation that at any
material time, any part of
whatever constitutes the premises had been in the process of construction.
illustration of the lack of precision in the content of the document
is with reference to a pipeline or system of pipelines
by which water was
conveyed from bore MDW4. Incidentally neither the bore nor the pipeline or
system of pipelines is located by
the plaintiff on the premises.
to the pipeline licence, the term 'pipeline' has the same meaning as that
established by the
Petroleum Pipelines Act
... a pipe or system of pipes used or intended to be used for the
conveyance of petroleum; and includes all structures for protecting
supporting a pipeline and all loading terminals, works and buildings and
all fittings, pumps, tanks, storage tanks, appurtenances
and appliances and any
facility, or any facility of a class, which is declared for the time being under
to be a pipeline facility for the purpose of this Act used in
connection with a pipeline ...
par 11, the plaintiff has drawn upon that meaning in putting the
proposition that a pipeline that conveyed bore water falls within
its ambit. In so doing he contends that the pipeline licence applied
to 'all structures, loading terminals, works and buildings,
fittings, pumps, tanks and storage tanks, appurtenances
appliances, and pipelines, which formed part of the process to access
underground water from bore MDW4 ...'.
par 11, the plaintiff has substituted the words 'and pipelines, which
formed part of the process to access underground water from
bore MDW4 ...' for
the words 'and any facility, or any facility of a class, which is
declared for the time being under
to be a pipeline facility
for the purpose of this Act used in connection with a pipeline ...',
but without reference to the declaration
by which that result was
established.
to refer to the relevant declaration presents an opportunity for the reader to
draw an inference.
by par 12 the plaintiff states that the licence 'also' applied to the pipes
connecting the MWD4 [sic] bore to the reverse osmosis
unit, it provides
another opportunity to infer that by some declaration the connection between the
MDW4 bore and the reverse osmosis
unit is within the scope of the licence.
for the meaning of the term 'the Macedon Gas Project' and the reference to a gas
treatment and compression plant, there is no
reason to consider that any
pipe or system of pipes for conveyance of any substance was located at the
content of the document provides no reason to consider that any of the
Petroleum Pipelines Act
Petroleum Pipelines (Environment)
Regulations
, the provisions of sch 1 of the Act; or the pipeline licence
that had issued to the applicant apply to whatever constitutes
the premises.
the extent that some measure of connection between the plaintiff and the
applicant would be constructed upon or informed by provisions
Petroleum Pipelines Act
Pipelines (Environment)
Regulations,
the provisions of sch 1 of the Act
and the pipeline
licence that had issued to the applicant, there is no allegation
that either the plaintiff or anyone else had been
involved in a pipeline
operation. There is also no allegation that the plaintiff had been
at or near a place where a pipeline operation
was being carried on.
The terms 'pipeline operation' and 'at or near a place where a pipeline
operation was being carried on' are
significant for the purposes of the Act.
further illustration of the lack of precision in the content of the document is
insofar as the plaintiff's exposure to water is
informed by the quality of
the water that he drew, transported and dispersed. Rather than simply state
that the water in pond 1
was potable and the water in pond 2 was not, the
pleader has embarked upon a process that results in a lack of clarity as to
water stored in pond 2 had engaged with the reverse osmosis unit.
to par 44, it was by the reverse osmosis unit that potable water was
produced from non-potable water. According to par
reverse osmosis water' was contained in both ponds 1 and 2.
The term 'reverse osmosis water' is introduced without any
meaning, but it suggests that prior to it being contained in each pond,
it had somehow encountered the reverse osmosis
unit. The content
of par 46a. does not countenance the distinction that
pond 1 contained 'the potable water' and pond 2,
'the non-potable
water' made by par 47.
submission of the plaintiff at the hearing was that in the process
of producing potable water, the reverse osmosis unit also
produced waste.
Hence the term 'reject water'. It had been introduced into the document without
any meaning being attributed to
explanation provided at the hearing cannot comfortably be transposed to the
document absent some amendment.
is by undergoing reverse osmosis that the plaintiff contends that water was
rendered usable. The only relevant uses that emerge
from the content of the
document that relate to the plaintiff are those suggested by reference to a
shower facility and the plaintiff's
dust suppression activities in the course of
his employment.
the plaintiff used non-potable water from pond 2 for the purposes
of dust suppression, it is unclear how that use would be reconciled
with the contention at par 43 that the water from the Birdrong Aquifer
could not be used until it underwent the process of reverse
par 48, the plaintiff introduces the terms 'high levels',
'waste product' and 'heavy metals' to qualify the non-potable
however no meaning is attributed to them.
par 49, in introducing information relating to the 'purportedly potable
water' the plaintiff draws upon unspecified times that
the analysis
outlined was undertaken.
plaintiff does not specify the 'various substances' and the 'heavy metals'
present in samples the subject of analysis.
term 'purportedly potable water' is introduced without any meaning being
attributed to it.
par 74, the plaintiff refers to samples of potable water taken from
the MDW4 bore. By par 44, the plaintiff submits that potable
was produced from non-potable water by the reverse osmosis unit.
content of par 74 is difficult to reconcile with the context established by
par 77, the plaintiff introduces a standard that is attributed
to unspecified heavy metals, toxic elements and/or unspecified
elements. It is 'above the range considered safe'.
term is out of place in any pleading.
anchor for introduction of all the material in the document that relates to
water is '[a]t the time of construction of the Macedon
Gas Project'. The
imprecision of expression of both the time of construction of the Macedon Gas
Project and the material time permits
scope for there being some overlap. The
plaintiff has not asserted that at any material time either the subsea gas
pipeline or the
onshore pipeline had been under construction.
a point after introducing pipes by which water was conveyed, the plaintiff
asserts that the
Petroleum Pipelines (Environment) Regulations
the construction of 'the pipeline'. He does not specify the pipeline to
which he refers.
the case of breach of duty of care is pursued on the basis that water stored in
ponds designated 1 and 2 had been conveyed to
and discharged into those ponds by
pipe, the plaintiff does not so allege. He leaves it to the reader to draw
an inference.
the reader would do so is the slender thread by which pages of the document that
relate to pipes and pipelines; the Act and
Regulations; and the pipeline licence
length of the document and the complexity that it presents generates the
question whether it would be appropriate to draw any
inference in favour of the
crisp point is that upon service of a statement of claim, the task
established for the reader ought to be straightforward. The
expectation
that a plaintiff will observe the rules and clearly allege material facts should
obviate the need for a reader to draw
any inference. A defendant should
not be set a task of interpretation.
pars 60 - 73, the plaintiff presents a narrative informed
by snapshots from his life during the period from 1 March 2013
November 2021. The material is interspersed with information
that clearly has been drawn from material either provided by medical
practitioners or providers of various forms of attention.
is inappropriate to present information in the pleading process other than by
unequivocal and succinct allegations of material
fact. In the case of the
content of pars 60 - 73, what does not fit that description
amounts to an outline of proposed evidence
whether of the plaintiff or his
proposed witnesses. Whilst it may inform, presentation of information in
that form complicates the
process of responding.
illustration of the presentation of irrelevant material is that the other parts
of par 5 are a string of statements that have
no significance for the
purposes of either claim. The second is the content
of par 19 by which the plaintiff locates seven structures
within the licence area of the petroleum pipeline licence issued to the
applicant. The third is by the page of text devoted to the
quotation of
parts of the Macedon Gas Project Environmental Protection Statement. The fourth
is the page of text that introduces
and then analyses features of water licences
issued to the applicant. It is remarkable that the pleader has gone
to the trouble
of pointing out that in the period prior
to 5 September 2013, the licences granted to the applicant had not
authorised it to take
water from the Birdrong Aquifer for the purpose of dust
suppression. The fifth is the reference to a Safety Case presented to an
unspecified minister.
a limited consideration of the content of the document to that point, there
is reason to consider that the first 77 paragraphs
that occupy the first 21
pages contain so many examples of imprecision of expression; text that
qualifies or obscures the information
and submissions presented; and irrelevant
material, that the merciful result for each party and the court would be that
77 be struck out as they may prejudice embarrass or
delay the fair trial of the action.
is not to suggest that the document undergo a transformation after that point.
The reason to conclude the process of considering
the utility of the material as
a pleading at that point is that there is no need to continue. What has
been canvassed relates to
roughly half of the number of paragraphs and roughly
40% of the pages. The observations that have been made in relation to their
content are no more than that. There is reason to consider that similar
observations are open on the balance of the material.
the part of the document so far considered, the applicant seeks only to strike
out pars 14, 20, 23, 26, 29, 43, 48, 57, and 59
on the ground that their
content may prejudice, embarrass or delay the fair trial of the action
and par 59 on the additional ground
that it discloses no cause
of action. It applies on each of those grounds in relation to
pars 99, 100, 105, 106, 107, 110, 115,
116 and 118.
14 is as follows:
The pipes connecting the MDW4 bore to the [reverse osmosis] unit and pipes
emanating from the [reverse osmosis] unit, were pipes
used for and in connection
with the earthwork and construction purposes and accordingly '
are pipelines
connected for purposes associated with the pipeline activity
', pursuant to
the [Petroleum Pipelines] Act.
of the applicant's written submission is as follows:
What is meant by 'pipelines connected for purposes associated with the pipeline
activity, pursuant to the PP [Petroleum Pipelines]
Act' is not clear from either
the paragraph, the remainder of the ASSOC [Amended Substituted Statement of
Claim], or the PP [Petroleum
Act itself. Neither:
(a) the phrase '
pipelines connected for purposes associated with the pipeline
(nor anything analogous to that phrase); nor
(b) the phrase 'pipeline activity'; nor
(c) the word 'associated',
appear anywhere in the [Petroleum Pipelines] Act.
his written submissions the plaintiff neither addresses that submission nor
assists with the process of understanding the meaning
of par 14. At no
point in his oral submissions was anything advanced that detracts from the
applicant's submission.
by par 14 nor otherwise does the plaintiff specify either the meaning of
the term 'the earthwork and construction purposes'
or to what it
content of par 14 is put as a submission, not an allegation
of material fact.
reason to strike out par 14 is that its content may prejudice, embarrass or
delay the fair trial of the action.
20 is as follows:
The PPER [Petroleum Pipeline (Environment) Regulations] also applied to the
construction of the pipeline, because the PPER [Petroleum
Pipeline (Environment)
Regulations] required (amongst other things), the First Defendant to submit an
environmental plan (
'The Environmental Plan'
) to the Environmental
Protection Authority ...which identified any environmental risks associated with
the pipeline activity.
content of par 20 does not identify the pipeline to which it relates.
It is remarkable that the Regulations took effect on 29
August 2012, part
way through the period that the plaintiff asserts his presence at whatever
constitutes the premises.
by the content of par 20 nor by the content of the balance of the document
is there a clear allegation that at any time any
pipeline had been under
construction. The work undertaken by the plaintiff in the course of his
employment suggests that any pipeline
that conveyed water that ultimately was
used for the purpose of dust suppression had been operational.
the applicant contends in its written submissions, the obligation to submit
an environmental plan arises only if the Regulations
so require.
content of par 20 puts a submission, not an allegation of material
reason to strike out par 20 is that it may prejudice, embarrass
or delay the fair trial of the action.
par 23 the plaintiff states the first defendant was:
... bound by the conditions in the Environmental Plan, to monitor all emission
and discharges from the pipeline activity, to identify
and minimise possible
risks of toxicity to flora/fauna and the surrounding environment including, the
people who lived and worked
within the worksite at the
plaintiff does not specify the pipeline to which the term 'the pipeline
activity' relates.
applicant has introduced into evidence the environmental plan approved by the
Minister and in reliance upon its content, contends
that it was not required to
comply as the plaintiff specifies.
the affidavit to which the plan was attached was filed within sufficient time of
the first date of hearing for the plaintiff
to determine whether it was the
document upon which he relies, his initial response was that the
applicant's case is not thereby
advanced. Implicitly it is only a
document that he would produce that would be determinative.
transpired that on the second day of hearing the plaintiff had satisfied himself
in relation to a plan that has been provided
by the applicant.
plaintiff then maintained the proposition advanced by par 23.
conditions to which par 23 refers were not identified in the course of
submissions.
reason to strike out par 23 is that it presents an unfounded submission
that relates to matters that are irrelevant. It serves
no purpose other
than that it may prejudice, embarrass or delay the fair trial of the action.
par 26 the plaintiff states as follows:
... pursuant to Regulation 33(1) of the PPER [Petroleum Pipelines (Environment)
Regulations], the first defendant was bound to conduct
regular monitoring of the
water quality emanating from the RO [reverse osmosis] unit, as both the potable
and reject water was sprayed
by the Plaintiff for the purposes of dust
suppression throughout the surrounding environment, namely, both inside and
outside the
plate of the Macedon Gas Project at the
33(1) is not to the effect contended by the plaintiff. It prescribes a
reporting period.
the applicant considered that by par 26 the plaintiff may have intended to
draw upon a different Regulation, by par 26 the
plaintiff impermissibly
puts a submission, not an allegation of material fact.
reason to strike out par 26 is that its content may
prejudice, embarrass or delay the fair trial of the action.
Paragraph 29
is as follows:
plaintiff] was '
a person engaged in a pipeline operation
' (within the
meaning of s56B (1) & (2) of the [Petroleum Pipelines] Act); and
or alternatively, he [the plaintiff] was a '
protected person'
(within the
meaning of the s56B (1) & (2) PP [Petroleum Pipelines] Act).
the provisions cited, Regulations may be made for either the occupational safety
and health of a person engaged in a pipeline
operation or the safety and health
of another protected person. The meaning of the latter term is given by
s 4 as a person who is
at or near a place where a pipeline
operation is being carried on at the invitation of or with express or implied
consent of the
its submissions the applicant characterises the parts of par 29
as bare allegations.
his submissions the plaintiff responded by drawing upon the content of
par 50. It is as follows:
At all material times during the period from in or about June 2012
to in or about April 2013, the plaintiff was,
directed or required by ... [his employer] to cart water at the Macedon Gas
Project. In this regard, the plaintiff's duties ...
involved driving a truck
... which carried approximately 14,000 litres of water at a time,
and disbursing the water ... in certain
areas in and around the site for
the purposes for dust suppression ...
50 does not establish the plaintiff within either part of par 29.
Establishing
the plaintiff in the classes of persons within the scope of an exercise or
potential exercise of regulatory power is
to no useful end. The only issues
that could be presented by the provisions are whether regulatory power has been
exercised and
if so, the result.
a plaintiff claims some entitlement under a Regulation, the claimant only
needs to plead the grounds upon which the entitlement
is generated, not
that a regulatory authority had been empowered to so regulate. That
is an issue is for a defendant to raise.
For the plaintiff to so allege is
anticipatory.
for the purposes of each part of par 29, there is no allegation that any
material time either the plaintiff or anyone
else had been undertaking a
pipeline operation. For the purposes
of par 29b., the plaintiff is not located at or near a place
any pipeline operation was being undertaken.
reason that each part of par 29 ought to be struck out is that
it serves no purpose other than that it may prejudice, embarrass
the fair trial of the action.
43 is as follows:
... due to the presence of various contaminants including, minerals and heavy
metals in Birdrong Aquifer, the water could not be
used until it underwent the
process of reverse osmosis ... (i.e. through the [reverse osmosis]
applicant takes issue with the lack of specificity presented by the phrase
'various contaminants including minerals and heavy
metals in the Birdrong
Aquifer' and that the water could not be used until it underwent the
process of reverse osmosis. It also
refers to the complexity generated by other
references to water in the pleading.
terms related to water used in the document are 'reverse osmosis water',
'reject water' and 'purportedly potable water'; terms
for which no meaning
is given, along with potable water and non-potable water.
par 43, the plaintiff puts a submission.
reason to strike out par 43 is that its content may
prejudice, embarrass or delay the fair trial of the action.
Paragraph 48
is as follows:
The non-potable water contained high levels of concentrated waste product
(including, heavy metals).
is nothing in the document that provides the meaning of the terms 'high levels'
and 'concentrated waste product'. By his submissions
the plaintiff refers to
par 49b, but by that paragraph the plaintiff refers to the unspecified
term 'purportedly potable water'.
reason to strike out par 48 is that its content may prejudice, embarrass or
delay the fair trial of the action.
par 57 the plaintiff states:
... that during his time at the Macedon Gas Project he was never informed or
advised as to the health hazards and dangers which the
First Defendant and/or
the Second Defendant knew or ought to have known of, in relation to using the
potable water from pond 1 and/or
the non-potable water from pond 2.
plaintiff does not specify any of the health hazards and dangers; either those
known to the applicant or those which it ought
to have known.
reason to strike out the content of par 57 is that it may prejudice,
embarrass or delay the fair trial of the action.
par 59 the plaintiff states:
At all material times (i.e. during the period from in or about June 2012 to in
or about April 2013), whilst at the Macedon Gas Project
worksite at the
premises, ...:
part of the dust suppression, he was continuously and regularly exposed to the
non-potable water from pond 2 and/or the potable
water from pond 1 and would
thereby inadvertently get splashed with the water that was intended for use for
wetting down ground cover,
and regularly being soaked right through into his
clothing to his skin;
would often get water in his mouth/nose and breathe in water from the spray
was splashed with the water when using the compressor pump to fill the truck;
water cartage trucks used to disperse water for dust suppression never totally
emptied resulting in cross-contaminated water,
that is, a combination of potable
and non-potable water being dispersed within the plate of the premises and
coming into contact
with the Plaintiff and other people present at the
to the extreme heat (which often exceeded 40 degrees Celsius), the water
sprayed onto the hot ground would evaporate forming a
cloud of steam and vapour
which he would inhale;
part of the dust suppression, he was continuously exposed to dust and
airborne dust on a daily basis, which was present at the
worksite premises, and
was also exposed to other elements including, air, soil, and crystalline silica;
was continuously subjected to dust inhalation from the dust rising from the
roads and paths, the wind blowing, the water cartage
trucks (and other vehicles)
and/or other workers (present at the premises);
approximately
4 of the 5 vehicles ...including, the water cartage trucks, which he drove in
the course of his dust suppression duties,
had no functioning air conditioning,
which forced the Plaintiff to drive the water cartage truck and 3 of the other
vehicles with
the windows down (due to the extreme heat), and as a
consequence, dust was always entering the cabin of the water cartage trucks
the 3 other vehicles;
maintenance
of the water cartage trucks was not conducted on a regular basis and
windows and access points to the cabins of the water
cartage trucks were not
well sealed to prevent dust ingress. Furthermore, there was no internal dust
extraction system in the water
cartage trucks the windows and access points to
the cabins of 4 of the vehicles (including, the water cartage truck) were not
sealed to prevent dust ingress. Furthermore, the cabins of 4 of the
vehicles (including, the water cartage truck) had no internal
dust extraction
systems. However, the fifth vehicle (which was a new semi-trailer),
had a working air conditioning system but did
not have an internal
dust extraction system; and
was also present in the accommodation village (including, the laundry area, wet
mess bar area and dining area). Despite regular
cleaning there was always
dust throughout the interior of his accommodation hut (donga), and the base of
the shower was always covered
in a red dust film (which emanated from the dust
he washed off his body);
(collectively referred to as the 'exposure').
focus of the following paragraphs is upon the extent of the contended exposure
as it would be likely to be of significance for
the purpose of informing
expert opinion.
reference to par 59a., by use of both the words 'continuously' and
'regularly' to outline the plaintiff's exposure to water,
that part of the
contention is rendered unclear. In a context where the plaintiff specifies that
he was soaked to his skin, it is
not clear what the plaintiff means by
'exposed', how such exposure relates to inadvertently getting splashed and the
extent of splashing.
In any event, by the point at which the plaintiff
asserts actual contact, the contention is rendered as a submission.
reference to par 59b., there is no allegation that would account for the
term 'the spray mist' and it is not clear whether the
spray mist would account
for the plaintiff getting water in his mouth/nose. Where over a period of
approximately one year, the plaintiff
was often getting water in his mouth/nose
and breathing in water from the spray mist, the contention 'often' is rendered
reference to par 59c., the regularity of the events when the plaintiff was
splashed when using the pump is even less certain
than the extent of
exposure accounted for by par 59b.
reference to par 59d., the fact that water dispersed within the plate of
the premises came into contact with the plaintiff may
amount to either the
exposure or the splashing referred to at par 59a. In the case of
par 59d., the plaintiff does not express the
regularity with which he came
into contact with the water in the manner that he describes. By par 59,
the plaintiff puts submissions.
the extent that by par 59d., the plaintiff suggests that the water cartage
trucks were unfit for purpose, there is no allegation
relating to their
provision to the plaintiff.
par 59d., and at other points in the document the plaintiff refers
to persons other than himself who were exposed to the plaintiff's
activities and to other emissions and discharges. Because each such reference
is irrelevant, it has no place within the document.
reference to par 59e., because it contains the only reference
to clouds of steam and vapour and par 59e. provides no indication
of the extent of the plaintiff's exposure to those clouds, there is nothing
other than the reference to the measure of heat to indicate
the frequency of
such exposure. By par 59 the plaintiff puts a submission.
reference to par 59f., the plaintiff's exposure to dust is expressed
to be both 'continuous' and 'daily'. Any conclusion is
rendered unclear.
The exposure to air, soil and crystalline silica is unexplained by the
balance of the document.
reference to par 59g., the statement that the plaintiff was subjected to
dust inhalation is imprecise. That the plaintiff contends
that his subjection
to dust inhalation was continuous is objectively at odds with the stated
mechanisms by which he was exposed.
reference to par 59h., a similar observation is made in relation
to the contention that dust was always entering the trucks
and the three
other vehicles.
the extent that dust entered any of the vehicles due to their condition, there
is no allegation relating to the provision of the
vehicles to the
reference to par 59i., the plaintiff refers to deficiencies
in vehicles with reference to dust ingress and lack of a dust extraction
system. There is no allegation relating to their provision to
the plaintiff. As for the material that goes to maintenance of the
vehicles, there is nothing to indicate that either the vehicles
themselves or the lack of maintenance had been a vector for his exposure.
reference to par 59j., the plaintiff refers to dust at the accommodation
village and that it was always in his donga and in
a film at the base
of a shower.
contention is introduced by reference to the plaintiff's worksite, not to the
premises upon which the facilities were located.
such facilities are transportable. There is nothing to suggest that the
applicant had any role to play in their provision
to the plaintiff.
par 59 the plaintiff outlines his exposure to dust, water and to both
potable and non-potable water, but only by reference to
circumstances
outlined in broad terms if at all and not to his exposure to any substance to
which he was thereby exposed. He does
so in circumstances where he
contends an array of discrete injuries that he attributes to exposure. Because
he attributes each injury
to unspecified exposure, he actually makes no
attribution. For that reason, he compromises the impact
reason to strike out the content of par 59 is that it may prejudice,
embarrass or delay the fair trial of the action.
proposition that par 59 discloses no reasonable cause of action was not
pressed at the hearing.
par 99, the plaintiff states:
... the first defendant as the operator/licensee of the Macedon Gas Project was
negligent because it breached the [Petroleum Pipelines]
what the plaintiff presents as particulars of breach, he states
at par 100 as follows:
The First Defendant breached the PP [Petroleum Pipelines]
Act by failing
to comply with Section 56A and Section 56B of the PP [Petroleum
Pipelines] Act, relevantly, in relation to occupational
safety and health
including, without limitation:
failing to provide for the safety and health of the Plaintiff engaged in the
pipeline operation;
failing to establish and maintain a system of management to secure the
occupational safety and health of the Plaintiff engaged
in the pipeline
operation; and
Plaintiff also repeats the allegations of negligence set out in par 96a. -
h. (inclusive) of the [substituted statement of claim]
mutatis mutandis
as further allegations of the First Defendants breach of the PP [Petroleum
Pipelines] Act.
s 56A Sch 1 is given effect. The schedule is designated occupational
safety and health. It contains a number of clauses relevant
considerations.
Objectively
the plaintiff could not be in breach of s 56A.
56B provides that Regulations may be made in relation to the occupational safety
and health of a person engaged in a pipeline
operation and in relation to the
safety and health of 'any other protected person'.
the plaintiff has not contended that the power to regulate had devolved to the
applicant, it could not have failed to comply with
Objectively
par 100c. does not fit within the scope provided by par 100 as the
specified statutory provisions are not engaged.
par 100c. the plaintiff engages par 96. It is a compendious statement
of the grounds for the proposition that the applicant was
negligent. Although
it runs to four pages of text, when internal references are considered, its
length would increase.
significant consideration in addressing the content of par 96 for the
purposes of par 100c. is that it should be immediately
apparent which
provision of the Act had been breached by any contended breach of the contended
duty of care. Because no such reference
is made it is not possible to
discern which statutory provision the plaintiff considered had been
Accordingly,
par 99 and each part of pars 100a. and 100 b. are struck out
on each basis proposed by the applicant. Paragraph 100c.
is struck out as it may prejudice, embarrass or delay the fair trial of the
par 105 the plaintiff states:
The Plaintiffs duties which involved (
) the dispersion of the
potable and non-potable water for the purposes of dust suppression
at the premises are '
operations or works carried out in relation
to a pipeline which may have an environmental impact
words in italics are one meaning given to the term 'pipeline activity', by the
Petroleum Pipelines (Environment) Regulations
words 'environmental impact' are themselves established as a defined
term in the same Regulations as:
Any change to the environment, whether adverse or beneficial, that wholly
or partly results from a pipeline activity of an operator.
water dispersed by the plaintiff had been drawn from ponds. There is no
allegation that the ponds had been supplied by pipes.
contention that pipes emanated from the reverse osmosis unit
is sufficiently removed from the process of dispersal of the
it is clear that the plaintiff's dispersal of water could
not be characterised as a pipeline activity.
the plaintiff does not allege that the emissions and discharges from the reverse
osmosis unit were made to the environment.
Although the default of the
applicant is expressed by reference to the reverse osmosis unit, it is clear
from the whole of the content
of the document. that it was the water that
the plaintiff dispersed that was released into the environment.
105 is struck out on each of the grounds for which the applicant contends.
par 106, the plaintiff states:
... the first defendant was negligent because it breached the relevant
regulations of the [Petroleum Pipeline] (Environment) Regulations
referred to in
par 104a. - f. (inclusive) of the [substituted statement of claim] (sic).
par 104a. - 104f. the plaintiff refers to regs 4, 5, 13, 15(7), 16 and 33.
4 provides a series of definitions whilst reg 5 provides an expanded
meaning of the term 'pipeline activity'.
13 provides that an 'environment plan' for a 'pipeline activity' must include
the matters set out in regs 14, 15, 16 and
Regulations
15(7) and 16 detail the requirements of an 'implementation strategy'
and the monitoring, recording and reporting arrangements
that must be included
in an 'environment plan'.
33 relates to monitoring and reporting emissions and discharges.
applicant could not be in breach of either reg 4 or reg 5.
To the extent that par 106 draws on those provisions it is struck
on each ground.
for each of the other parts of par 104, by par 107 the plaintiff provides
particulars of the allegation of negligence put by par
as follows:
The First Defendant breached the [Petroleum Pipelines (Environment)
Regulations], because it failed to comply with:
33, relevantly, by failing to test, monitor and report on the potable and
non-potable water, being an '
emission or discharge
', from the [reverse
osmosis] unit. The potable and non-potable water that the Plaintiff was
required to use for dust suppression
was not monitored for safety or to
determine the presence of heavy metals and/or other contaminants,
that constituted a hazard or
danger and thereby a risk of injury to the
Plaintiff's health. The non-potable water was sprayed outside the plate with no
to the consequences for the Plaintiff's safety. The spraying of the
non-potable water was contrary to the First Defendant's Environmental
Regulations
16 and 31, relevantly, by failing to store and maintain each document or record
as provided in subregulation (2). The
Plaintiff says that the First Defendant
has failed to 'store and maintain records' of the [reverse osmosis] unit
potable and non-potable
water 36 monitoring and test results; and
and better particulars may be provided, once discovery and inspection have taken
the scope of the content of par 104, by par 107 the allegation of negligence by
reference to the Regulations is limited
to contentions that relate only to
regs 16, 31 and 33.
for the first sentence of par 107a., it is only by the terms
of an environmental plan approved by the Minister that any obligation
to test emissions or discharges is established.
plaintiff does not contend that the relevant environmental plan had established
any requirement to either test or monitor the
potable and non-potable water.
defendant submitted that the relevant environmental plan approved by the
Minister did not so provide, accordingly the applicant
could not be in breach.
By his submissions the plaintiff did not contend otherwise.
there is nothing to justify the breach contended by
par 107a, it is appropriate that it be struck out on each
ground sought by
the applicant.
balance of paragraph 107a. is not within the scope of reg 33.
It is struck out on the basis that its content may prejudice,
embarrass or delay the fair trial of the action.
for the content of par 107b., of regs 16 and 31, it is only the latter that
has a subregulation (2).
16 provides:
The environment plan must include arrangements
(a) monitoring, and recording information about, the pipeline activity that are
sufficient to enable the Minister to determine
(i) the environmental performance
objectives and environmental performance standards in the environment plan had
been met; and
(ii) the implementation strategy in the environment plan has been complied
(b) reporting to the Minister on the information recorded under paragraph (a) at
intervals agreed with the Minister, but not less
often than annually.
is relatively easy to come to the conclusion that no default of the applicant in
the terms proposed by par 107b. is within the
for the prospect that by par 107b., the plaintiff contends that the
applicant was in breach of reg 31, it is evident that the
of the plaintiff is on the correlation between subregulation (2)
and a failure to store records of monitoring and test results
under reg 33; in particular, records that relate to emissions or
discharges of the reverse osmosis unit.
that point, analysis may run along the lines that if by the environment plan the
applicant had not been required to test, monitor
and report on the
emissions or discharges of the reverse osmosis unit then there was no record to
maintain or store for the purposes
of complying with reg 31(2).
the content of par 107b. permits some different analysis,
there is reason to consider that failure to consider that prospect
from the insufficiency of the content of par 107b.
content of par 107b. ought to be struck out as it may prejudice, embarrass
or delay the fair trial of the action.
applicant pressed the proposition that regs 16 and 31 do not establish a
private right of action.
of reg 31 might be characterised as an offence as it specifies
a penalty. There is nothing in the content of reg 31 that
generates any
momentum towards the conclusion that in addition to a penalty, breach of
its provisions would establish a benefit in
any class of persons.
breach of reg 16 attracts no penalty, the benefit it establishes is for the
Minister. The regulation generates no momentum
to the conclusion that any
benefit had been conferred upon any class of persons.
the extent that par 107b. draws upon either of reg 16 or 31,
it is struck out as it discloses no reasonable cause of action.
par 110, the plaintiff states:
The First Defendant was negligent in that it breached the
[Petroleum Pipelines Occupational Safety and Health Regulations], because
it failed to take all reasonably practicable steps to ensure that the
pipeline operation (at the Macedon Gas Project at the premises)
was carried out
in a manner that was safe and without risk to the health of the Plaintiff
'a person engaged in the pipeline operation
protected person
'), in that it failed to adequately or at all:
the content of par 110 suggests, it would be by reference to some
specified pipeline operation that the provisions of sch 1 of
the Act would be
engaged. The plaintiff specifies no pipeline operation.
reason to strike out par 110 is that it may prejudice, embarrass
or delay the fair trial of the action.
applicant did not press the contention that par 110 be struck on the
additional ground.
par 115, the plaintiff states:
Further or alternatively, the injuries were caused or contributed
to, by the breach of s 5 of the [
Occupiers Liability Act
by the First Defendant ... (and... [its] agents, employees, contractors and/or
sub-contractors).
5(1) of the
Occupiers' Liability Act
is as follows:
Subject to (2) and (3) the care which an occupier of premises is required
by reason of the occupation or control of the premises
to show towards
a person entering on the premises in respect of dangers which are due to the
state of the premises or to anything
done or omitted to be done on the
premises and for which the occupier is by law responsible
his submissions the plaintiff refers to a duty to ensure contractor compliance
with the provisions of sch 1 of the Act. He also
refers to the content of
pars 50, 59 and 2h.
par 2h., the plaintiff identifies the relevant statutory duty.
By par 50 he outlines his work duties and by par 59, the
Paragraph 59 has been struck due to its various insufficiencies.
par 50 the plaintiff does not advance a case 'in respect of dangers
which are due to the state of the premises or to anything
done or omitted
to be done on the premises and for which the occupier is by law
responsible'.
par 116, the plaintiff states particulars of breach of the
Liability Act
. The particulars express the allegations set out
in paragraphs 96a. - h., 100a. - c.,
107a - c. and 110a. All but pars 96a. - h.
96 has earlier been considered in addressing par 100c in the context
of the proposition that particulars of negligence
would be established as
particulars of breach of the
Petroleum Pipelines Act
present purposes, consideration of the content of par 96
is no different. Any parts of par 96 by which the plaintiff
would engage
the statutory duty are not sufficiently articulated with reference
to the statutory duty to discern their significance.
of pars 115 and 116 are struck out as their content may prejudice,
embarrass or delay the fair trial of the action.
par 118, the plaintiff states:
'[The plaintiff] has required treatment, as a result of the injuries that were
caused by or contributed to, by the negligence and/or
breach of statutory
duties by the [applicant] ... .
par 119, the plaintiff states particulars of the medications and supplements to
which he refers by the term 'treatment' at par
118. At par 119,
the plaintiff specifies 15 medications and supplements but does not connect any
of those medications or supplements
with any condition that by par 118 he
characterises as an injury.
paragraphs are intended to be read together and also together with pars 72
and 73 by which his injuries are recorded. On that
basis and for that reason it
is not possible to correlate discrete injuries with medications and supplements.
is open to consider that at some point each of the parties will seek expert
opinion that draws upon the allegations made by the
plaintiff as to the
injuries and their treatment. Until the plaintiff correlates one to the other,
it is likely both that the task
could not either be possible or undertaken
efficiently and that such an undertaking may be flawed by particular inferences
by a proposed witness.
is appropriate that pars 118 and 119 be struck out as their content may
prejudice embarrass or delay the fair trial of the action.
would be a significant benefit to be realised in granting leave to apply as to
do so will permit consideration of at least
parts of the pleading prior to
trial. The benefit for each of the parties and for the court are
obvious. To refrain from engaging
with the task established by the substantive
application carries the real prospect that the issues presented would be
canvassed at
trial. That would be at least undesirable.
each point on which the applicant has been successful, there is reason to
exercise of discretion in favour of there being leave
to bring that part of the
application.
certify that the preceding paragraph(s) comprise the reasons for decision of the
District Court of Western Australia.
23 SEPTEMBER 2025
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (374 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter