URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WASC/2025/462.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:07:29
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
SCOTT RUSSELL MCGREGOR -v- ANDREW MICHAEL SMITH AND ROBERT ALLAN JACOBS as joint and several administrators of BAYVIEW HEALTH - MATILDA BAY PHARMACY PTY LTD (SUBJECT TO DEED OF COMPANY ARRANGEMENT) [2025] WASC 462 (4 November 2025)
COURT OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
RUSSELL MCGREGOR -v- ANDREW MICHAEL SMITH AND ROBERT ALLAN JACOBS as joint and
several administrators of BAYVIEW HEALTH - MATILDA
BAY PHARMACY PTY LTD (SUBJECT
TO DEED OF COMPANY ARRANGEMENT)
[2025] WASC 462
OCTOBER 2025
DELIVERED :
OCTOBER 2025
PUBLISHED :
NOVEMBER 2025
COR 153 of 2025
RUSSELL MCGREGOR
KIM GODFREY
MICHAEL SMITH as joint and several administrator of BAYVIEW HEALTH - MATILDA BAY
PHARMACY PTY LTD (SUBJECT TO DEED OF COMPANY
ARRANGEMENT)
ALLAN JACOBS as joint and several administrator of BAYVIEW HEALTH - MATILDA BAY
PHARMACY PTY LTD (SUBJECT TO DEED OF COMPANY
ARRANGEMENT)
MICHAEL SMITH as joint and several administrator of BAYVIEW HEALTH NORTH SHORE
PHARMACY PTY LTD (SUBJECT TO DEED OF COMPANY
ARRANGEMENT)
ALLAN JACOBS as joint and several administrator of BAYVIEW HEALTH NORTH SHORE
PHARMACY PTY LTD (SUBJECT TO DEED OF COMPANY
ARRANGEMENT)
HEALTH - MATILDA BAY PHARMACY PTY LTD (SUBJECT TO DEED OF COMPANY ARRANGEMENT)
HEALTH NORTH SHORE PHARMACY PTY LTD (SUBJECT TO DEED OF COMPANY ARRANGEMENT)
Corporations
- Insolvency - Security interests over personal property - Whether security
interests securing obligations of facility
agreements arose after appointment of
administrators - Application to extend time to the extent necessary for
registration of security
interests - Proper construction of s 588FL of
Corporations Act 2001
Legislation:
Corporations
Application
Representation:
First Plaintiff
First Defendant
No appearance
No appearance
Third Defendant
No appearance
No appearance
Fifth Defendant
No appearance
Sixth Defendant
No appearance
Solicitors:
First Plaintiff
Hotchkin Hanly
Hotchkin Hanly
First Defendant
Corrs Chambers
Corrs Chambers
Third Defendant
Corrs Chambers
Corrs Chambers
Fifth Defendant
Corrs Chambers
Sixth Defendant
Corrs Chambers
referred to in decision:
judgment was delivered extemporaneously and has been edited from the transcript
to include references, headings and to correct
matters of grammar and
expression.)
originating process dated 3 October 2025, the plaintiffs seek orders
pursuant to
Corporations
(Cth) (Act) that would, to the extent necessary for the purposes
s 588FL(2)(b)(iv)
of the Act, extend the time for the registration of
two security interests.
Originally,
the plaintiffs also sought orders pursuant to
Insolvency Practice Schedule
(Corporations)
(IPS) (being sch 2 to the
Corporations Act 2001
(Cth) (Act))
that the plaintiffs and defendants were justified in not seeking relief under
of the Act in respect of these security interests. The plaintiffs
have since indicated in their submissions filed with the court
that these orders
are no longer pressed.
the time the originating process was filed, the plaintiffs filed a certificate
of urgency. For this reason, the originating process
has been listed before me
today on an urgent basis.
support of the application, the plaintiffs rely on three affidavits of Stephen
James Kikiros, a senior associate employed by the
plaintiffs' solicitors: two
open affidavits filed 3 and 6 October 2025; and one confidential affidavit
filed 3 October 2025 (Confidential
Affidavit).
considering the application, I have had the benefit of a written outline of
submissions filed by the plaintiffs, as well as brief
oral submissions from
counsel who appeared before me today.
am satisfied from the documents filed and the submissions from counsel that the
application has been served on the Australian Securities
and Investments
Commission (ASIC) and the solicitors for the defendants, and that neither
intends to appear at the hearing today
or to be heard on the orders sought in
application.
I specifically note that the defendants have informed the court that they
consent to the orders sought being made.
Factual background
of the factual background to this application was canvassed in my previous
decision concerning the administration of these
I do not intend to repeat that summary and in these reasons adopt the
definitions that I used in those original reasons.
the date of those reasons, the following matters have occurred.
4 September 2025, the Administrators convened a concurrent second creditors'
meeting for Matilda Bay and North Shore. At that
meeting, the creditors resolved
that the Companies execute a DOCA proposed by the
plaintiffs.
25 September 2025, the plaintiffs, the Administrators, and the Companies entered
into a DOCA in respect of Matilda Bay and North
Shore. On the same
(a) the plaintiffs, the first defendants, and the third defendant entered into
the Matilda Bay Facility Agreement and an associated
General Security Deed
(Matilda Bay Security Agreements); and
(b) the plaintiffs, the second defendants, and the fourth defendant entered into
the North Shore Facility Agreement and an associated
General Security Deed
(North Shore Security Agreements),
Agreements).
the DOCA and the Security Agreements, the plaintiffs are required to
progressively advance and make funding of at least $2.8
million available
to the Companies. This funding is secured by the associated General Security
26 September 2025, the plaintiffs registered the Security Agreements on the PPSR
Personal Property Securities Act
Should the relief sought by the plaintiffs under s
588FM(2) be granted?
accept that the plaintiffs have standing to seek relief under s 588FM of
the Act as interested parties, on the basis that they
are directors and admitted
creditors of one or both Companies and are the proponents of the DOCA entered
into by the
plaintiffs seek relief under s 588FM as there is uncertainty as to whether
the security interests created by the Security Agreements,
which were entered
into after the appointment of the external administrators, have vested in the
companies by way of the operation
of s 588FL of the Act.
issue arises because of the question as to whether, by operation of s 588FL
of the Act, the security interest created by each
of the Facility Agreements
(namely, the General Security Deeds), which occurred after the appointment of
the first and second defendants
as external administrators and subsequently deed
administrators of the Companies, has vested in the each of the Companies.
Specifically,
the issue arises because the Security Agreements have not been
registered until after the 'critical time' referred to in s 588FL(7)(a)
the Act, being the appointment of external administrators.
is uncontroversial that the Security Agreements are 'security interests' within
the meaning of that phrase in s 12 of the PPSA
and 'PPSA security
interests' within the meaning of s 9 of the Act.
'registration time' of the security interests under s 588FL(2)(b)(ii) is
26 September 2025, which self-evidently is after the
date the first and
second plaintiffs were appointed as external administrators of the Companies.
The plaintiffs deny the effect of
s 588FL(4) is to vest the security
interests in the Companies.
a security interest is not perfected in the manner prescribed by the PPSA prior
to the appointment of an external administrator,
the security interest vests in
This vesting is
irreversible.
security interest is perfected if it has attached to collateral, is enforceable
against third parties, and certain extra steps
(such as registration on the
PPSR) have been taken to protect the
to s 588FL of the Act, a security interest under the PPSA vests in the
company on the appointment of a voluntary administrator
(a) the security interest is enforceable and was perfected by registration;
(b) it was registered within the six months preceding the administration or
liquidation; but
(c) it was not registered within 20 business days after the grant, unless it was
registered within such later time as is ordered
by the court under s 588FM
the moment, there is a divergence on the authorities as to the extent to which
s 588FL of the Act applies to security interests
that arise after the
'critical time', but before the company is no longer the subject of an external
administration. I relatively
recently considered and summarised this divergence
Re Yeeda Pastoral
Company (admins apptd); Ex parte
Those reasons set out my views in relation to the matter. However, as I noted in
that decision, at present, there still remains no
intermediate appellant
authority that finally determines the proper construction of s 588FL of the
Act, nor has there been any further
consideration of the issue by any first
instance judge.
orders sought by the plaintiffs are conditional on there being a requirement for
an extension of time for registration under
s 588FM of the Act. In my view,
these orders are practical and are an appropriate resolution of the issue that
is confronted by the
plaintiffs in the absence of any binding authority on this
my view, it would be just and equitable to make the orders sought as required by
s 588FM(2)(b) of the Act. This is because the
security interest forms part
of the DOCA approved by the majority of creditors of the Companies, which will
enable creditors to be
paid in full (together with interest).
these circumstances, it is my view that it would be just and equitable to make
the orders sought.
Should confidentiality orders be made over the
Confidential Affidavit?
plaintiffs also seek confidentiality orders to be made over the Confidential
Affidavit, pursuant to O 67B r 5(3) of the
Rules of the Supreme Court 1971
plaintiffs submit the contents of the Confidential Affidavit are commercially
sensitive and confidential.
considered the contents of the affidavit, particularly the annexures (which are
the relevant agreements the subject of this
application), I am satisfied that
the confidential affidavit is confidential, and that it is appropriate to make
the confidentiality
orders sought.
I note that reference to these documents has been made in the creditors' reports
and the subject of the DOCA proposal, the
details of these agreements has not
been publicly disclosed. In those circumstances, I am satisfied that the
agreements are appropriately
considered to be confidential.
Conclusion and orders
plaintiffs sought orders for the costs of the application to be costs in the
administration of North Shore and paid from the
fund contemplated by the DOCA.
In my view, this is the appropriate costs order.
also accept that the form of the orders sought in terms of service of the
court's orders on creditors of the Company, and the allowance
for any aggrieved
party to apply to this court to vacate or vary these orders, will protect the
creditors of the Companies from any
possible prejudice that could be caused by
the application.
certify that the preceding paragraph(s) comprise the reasons for decision of the
Supreme Court of Western Australia.
Associate to the Honourable
Justice Hill
4 NOVEMBER 2025
Affidavit of Stephen James Kikiros filed 6 October 2025, 'SJK-22' - 'SJK-23'.
Re Bayview Health -
Matilda Bay Pharmacy Pty Ltd (admins apptd) and Bayview Health North Shore
Pharmacy Pty Ltd (admins apptd); ex
parte Smith & Jacobs [No 2]
[2025] WASC
Affidavit of Stephen James Kikiros filed 3 October 2025 [10], 'SJK-14'.
Affidavit of Stephen James Kikiros filed 3 October 2025 [11] - [12], 'SJK-15'.
Affidavit of Stephen James Kikiros filed 3 October 2025,
Affidavit of Stephen James Kikiros filed 3 October 2025 [13] - [14], 'SJK-18' -
Affidavit of Stephen James Kikiros filed 3 October 2025,
Personal Property Securities Act 2009
Re One Steel Manufacturing
Pty Ltd (admin apptd)
[2017] NSWSC 21
(2017) 93 NSWLR 611
Personal Property Securities Act 2009
Re Yeeda Pastoral Company
(admins apptd); Ex parte Tucker
[2024] WASC 120
[73] - [78].
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (184 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter