URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WADC/2025/80.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:02:53
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
TUCCI -v- THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER OF THE DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORT AND MAJOR INFRASTRUCTURE [2025] WADC 80 (10 November 2025)
DISTRICT COURT OF WESTERN
TUCCI -v- THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER OF THE DEPARTMENT OF
TRANSPORT AND MAJOR INFRASTRUCTURE [2025] WADC 80
JEYAMOHAN DCJ
12 SEPTEMBER 2025 & SUBMISSIONS PROVIDED 17 & 22
SEPTEMBER 2025
DELIVERED :
10 NOVEMBER 2025
FILE NO/S :
CIVO 116 of 2025
VINCENZO TUCCI
THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER OF THE DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORT AND MAJOR
INFRASTRUCTURE
Application for extraordinary licence -
Traffic (Authorisation to Drive) Act 2008
(WA) - Whether principal means of
obtaining income encompasses alternative employment - Turns on own facts
Legislation:
Road Traffic (Authorisation to Drive) Act
Application allowed
Chief Executive Officer ordered to grant the applicant an extraordinary
licence for a period of 12 months subject to appropriate conditions
Representation:
Mr M Tennent-Brown
Mr A Hornigold
Solicitors:
Austral Legal Pty Ltd
Department of Transport - Legal & Legislative Services
Case(s) referred to in decision(s):
Alcan (NT) Alumina Pty Ltd v Commissioner of Territory Revenue
[2009] HCA 41
(2009) 239 CLR 27
Australian Unity Property Ltd v City of Busselton
[2018] WASCA 38
Certain Lloyd's Underwriters Subscribing to Contract No IH00AAQS v Cross
[2012] HCA 56
(2012) 248 CLR 378
CIC Insurance Ltd v Bankstown Football Club Ltd
[1997] HCA 2
(1997) 187 CLR
Commissioner of Taxation v Consolidated Media Holdings Ltd
[2012] HCA 55
(2012) 250 CLR 503
Director General of Department of Transport v McKenzie
[2016] WASCA 147
Inco Europe Ltd v First Choice Distribution (a firm)
[2000] UKHL 15
[2000] 1 WLR 586
2 All ER 109
Italiano v The Director General of Transport
[1999] WASCA 40
(1999) 29 MVR
Lenegan v Director General of the Department of Transport
[2012] WADC 102
McGree v The Chief Executive Officer of the Department of Transport
Minister for Employment and Workplace Relations v Gribbles Radiology Pty Ltd
[2005] HCA 9
(2005) 222 CLR 194
Minister for Immigration and Citizenship v SZJGV
[2009] HCA 40
Project Blue Sky Inc v Australian Broadcasting Authority
[1998] HCA 28
(1998) 194 CLR 355
Saeed v Minister for Immigration and Citizenship
[2010] HCA 23
Taylor v The Owners - Strata Plan 11564
[2014] HCA 9
(2014) 253 CLR 531
Thiess v Collector of Customs
[2014] HCA 12
(2014) 250 CLR 664
Wentworth Securities Ltd v Jones
[1980] AC 74
Introduction
10 February 2025, the applicant, Mr Vincenzo Tucci,
was disqualified from holding or obtaining a driver's licence for
of three years as a result of having been convicted for failing to
stop and assist in circumstances of grievous bodily harm, contrary
Road Traffic Act
(WA) (RTA).
pleaded guilty to the offence and was sentenced to 16 months' imprisonment,
of which four months were served immediately
(from 10 February to
10 June 2025) and 12 months suspended until 10 June 2026. This
is Mr Tucci's first criminal conviction.
was working at the time of the commission of the offence on 15 March 2023
as operations manager for Shepheard Pty Ltd (Shepheard).
offence occurred in circumstances where Mr Tucci inadvertently ran over a
person (Mr Jones) who was 'sleeping rough' on a hardstand
area beside the
Water Corporation wastewater pumping station situated at Lot 282 Bussell
Highway, Margaret River whilst driving into
the site in a Mitsubishi tanker
The incident
occurred at approximately 5.10 am on 15 March 2023.
offence did not involve speed, drugs or alcohol.
application dated 7 July 2025 (as amended with leave) (Application),
Mr Tucci has applied to this court under
Road Traffic
(Authorisation to Drive) Act 2008
(WA) (the Act) for an order directing the
Chief Executive Officer of the Department of Transport (CEO) to grant him an
extraordinary
licence to enable him to resume work as operations manager at
Application is opposed by the CEO.
Application was heard on 12 September 2025. Following the hearing, orders
were made permitting both parties to file further
submissions regarding the
timing of the Application and the operation of
of the Act. The
parties filed their submissions on 17 September 2025 and 22 September
2025, respectively.
the reasons that follow, I am satisfied that the refusal of the Application
an undue financial burden on Mr Tucci by depriving him of his principal
means of obtaining income within the meaning of
of the Act;
Mr Tucci of the only practicable means of travelling to and from the place
at which he is employed within the meaning of
having taken into account and considered each of the mandatory relevant
considerations set out in
of the Act, I am satisfied that it is
appropriate to grant the Application, subject to appropriate conditions, and
make an order
directing the CEO to grant Mr Tucci an extraordinary licence
for a period of 12 months pursuant to
Legislative framework
of the Act, a person who is disqualified under the Act or any other
written law from holding or obtaining a driver's licence may
apply to a court
for an order directing the CEO to grant to the person an extraordinary
power to grant an extraordinary licence is found in
of the Act, in the
following terms:
for consideration of court
(1) A court may -
(a) make an order directing the
CEO, on payment of the prescribed fee, to grant to the applicant an
extraordinary licence for a period
not exceeding 12 months from the date on
which it is granted as the court thinks fit; or
(b) refuse the application.
(2) In making a decision for the purposes of subsection (1), the court is
to have regard to -
(a) the safety of the public
generally; and
(b) the character of the applicant; and
(c) the circumstances of the case; and
(d) the nature of the offence or offences giving rise to the
disqualification; and
(e) the conduct of the applicant subsequent to the disqualification.
[(3) deleted]
(4) Despite subsections (1) and (2), the court must not make an order directing
the grant of an extraordinary licence unless it is
satisfied that the refusal of
the application would -
(a) deprive the applicant
of the means of obtaining urgent medical treatment for an illness, disease or
disability known to be suffered
by the applicant or a person who is a member of
his or her family; or
(b) place an undue financial burden on the applicant or his or her family, by
depriving the applicant of his or her principal means
of obtaining income; or
(c) deprive the applicant or a person who is a member of the applicant's
family of the only practicable means of travelling to and
from the place at
which the applicant or that person, as the case may be, is employed.
matters specified in
of the Act are mandatory relevant
considerations.
exercising its discretion the five mandatory relevant considerations
referred to above must be taken into account. They involve
various potentially
countervailing considerations that the court must weigh against each other in
deciding whether to grant a licence
of the Act is that the court is prohibited from making an
order under
, directing the CEO to grant to the applicant an
extraordinary licence, unless the court is satisfied that the refusal of
the application
would have the consequence specified in par (a) or par (b) or
court may only grant an extraordinary licence for the purpose of overcoming or
relieving one or more of the specified consequences
which the applicant has
established, by evidence, to the court's
satisfaction.
a mandatory precondition to granting an application specified in subsection (4)
has been satisfied, it does not necessarily
follow that the court must exercise
its discretion to grant the
application.
of the Act the court may impose such conditions as it thinks
proper subject to the observance of which the authority to drive under
licence may be exercised. The power is to be exercised consistently with the
objects of the Act, which are primarily derived
conditions imposed must relate or be incidental to overcoming or relieving one
of the consequences specified in subpars (a),
(b) or (c) of
discretionary power to impose conditions must be exercised consistently with
court may, in an appropriate case, reconcile countervailing considerations under
by imposing conditions that would make the granting of an
application
appropriate.
Circumstances of the offence
circumstances of the offence can be summarised as follows.
282 Bussell Highway, Margaret River, is a Water Corporation wastewater pumping
station (Site). Access to the Site is not restricted
and it is an access point
for the public to access nature trails. The Site has no
surface to the access track to the Site is unsealed. There is an area beside
the water pump station which has a sealed bitumen
surface, referred to as a
the night of 14/15 March 2023, Mr Jones was present at the Site.
Mr Jones was homeless at the time and was lying on his back
hardstand, partially covered by a sleeping
the Site in a Mitsubishi tanker truck. Mr Tucci entered the Site
purpose of turning his truck around in order to drive in the opposite direction
he had come from on Bussell
Mr Tucci turned into the hardstand before stopping his truck and reversed
back out again in order to turn
the truck's wheels drove over Mr Jones' pelvic area. Mr Jones
screamed in pain. Mr Jones saw the vehicle (had) stopped
and started
reversing, he saw the reverse
stopped the truck, got out of the truck, and approached Mr Jones, at which
point Mr Jones shouted at him 'you ran over me'.
Mr Jones says that
Mr Tucci said nothing (to
Mr Tucci says that he asked the person (Mr Jones) if he 'was
then got back into the truck and left the
was assisted by Mr Matwiejew, himself a homeless man who happened to be
sleeping at the Site some distance from Mr Jones,
who having heard the
truck's engine and Mr Jones' screams, ran to a nearby service station,
called 000 for an ambulance and directed
the ambulance on arrival to
witness, Mr Hughes, who was staying at the Margaret Forest Holiday
Apartment, heard a very loud scream that he thought was
a male voice somewhere
to the north of his room which was located adjacent to the bush/forest
sustained multiple pelvic fractures, 6% body burns, and required surgery
and skin grafts.
Thursday, 16 March 2023, Mr Tucci identified himself to the Western
Australia Police Force (WA Police) as a result of a media
broadcast regarding
the incident.
Until this time, Mr Tucci had not reported the incident to the WA
participated in an audio-visual record of interview with WA Police regarding the
incident, and admitted
drove his truck into the parking lot.
he was reversing he noticed a person in a blanket and got scared.
immediately got out of the truck and had a feeling he had hurt somebody.
asked the person 'what are you [d]oing there? Are you okay' and the person
replied 'I'm okay'.
was relieved, got back into his truck and carried on with his day.
the later afternoon, he had seen police in the area and he checked the news
because he worked (out) that it may have been a stranger
connected to what
happened in the morning.
was around 5.30 am.
pleaded guilty to the offence and was sentenced to 16 months' imprisonment,
of which four months were served immediately
(from 10 February to
10 June 2025) and 12 months suspended until 10 June 2026.
received a three-year licence disqualification imposed by this court on
10 February 2025 following his conviction for failing
to stop and assist in
circumstances of grievous bodily harm, contrary to
of the RTA. Mr Tucci's licence disqualification
commenced upon his release from prison.
The application
application dated 7 July 2025 Mr Tucci seeks an order directing the
CEO to grant him an extraordinary licence that allows Mr Tucci
Vehicles of class:
MC, HC, HR, MR, LR, C,
in these localities:
Within a 500km from Busselton Courthouse
on these days at these times:
Monday - Sunday, 24 hours per day.
for these purposes:
To drive to and from home to place of employment and to
drive in the course of employment.
for the purposes of work
as operations manager at Shepheard.
Supporting evidence
in his affidavit in support of the Application affirmed 2 July 2025 (Tucci
Affidavit) deposes
resides in Margaret River and is the operations manager with Shepheard.
is currently serving a three-year licence disqualification imposed by this court
on 10 February 2025 for the offence committed
on 15 March
offence was failing to stop to assist in circumstances of grievous bodily
circumstances were that he had inadvertently run over a person (Mr Jones)
who was 'sleeping rough' on a hardstand area when he
turned his truck around in
had not seen Mr Jones as his truck headlights had not illuminated
Mr Jones' location as his truck swung around in the course of
was not suggested that he was driving in a careless or dangerous manner, but
rather, that he failed to stop for long enough to
ensure that Mr Jones was
pleaded guilty to the offence in accordance with the Statement of Material
Facts, a copy of which is attached to the Tucci
addition to his licence disqualification, that this court sentenced him to a
period of imprisonment of 16 months, of which he served
four months
immediately and the remaining 12 months of which is suspended (which
Mr Tucci is still subject to at
extension, his period of licence disqualification did not commence until he was
released from his period of immediate imprisonment
evidenced by the WA Police document entitled 'Traffic Infringements dated
three traffic infringements and up until the conviction leading to his current
disqualification, he otherwise had a 'clean'
offence did not involve drugs or
has nevertheless obtained a recent set of blood tests (including for liver
function) through his general practitioner,
is also subject to random drug and alcohol testing both through his employment,
and also at some of the sites which he goes onto
in the course of his work with
does not drink alcohol and has not done so for many years.
does not use non-prescription
being released from prison, he is back living at his home with his partner,
Ms Girometti.
is no public transport in or around the area which he would use to get to and
River only has a limited taxi service and can offer no assurance of being
available at the times he may need it to be able
to get to and from
roads he has to travel on are not suitable for riding a bike (bicycle) to and
from work safely at the times he needs to travel
(which are often in the dark)
due to being frequented by heavy vehicles and having limited shoulder space for
current net weekly base income is approximately $1,250 (more if Mr Tucci
works overtime) and his weekly expenses are approximately
$1,100. He does not
earn enough to a pay a driver to get him to and from
such, driving is the only practical means of transport available to him to get
to and from
being released from prison, his employer has kept him employed, giving him tasks
other than driving until such time as this
Application is
determined.
employment with Shepheard is his means of obtaining
has made it clear that if the Application is unsuccessful, that his employment
will come to an end given the length of Mr
Tucci's licence disqualification
still to run.
being released from prison, he has relied on Ms Girometti and others to
drive from his home to the work depot and then drive
a truck to the site of the
call-out. On those occasions, he would be able to provide written confirmation
of the call-out locations
and details if required to by WA Police as a condition
of an extraordinary
has requested that he be permitted to drive within a 500 km radius of the
work depot.
his Application, he has proposed a radius of 500 km from Busselton
Courthouse.
regrets the actions which led to his conviction, imprisonment and licence
disqualification.
been imprisoned and disqualified, that he now fully appreciates the gravity of
his actions and that he is sorry for the harm
let Mr Jones, himself, his family and Shepheard
being released from prison, he has completed a Traffic Offender Intervention
provided him with further insight into, amongst other things, the seriousness of
road trauma and the impact on other people
who have to deal with
remains subject to a period of suspended imprisonment through until 10 June
is fortunate to have the ongoing support of his partner, employer and
granted an extraordinary licence, he would take every precaution to ensure that
he complies with any conditions imposed upon it,
and understands that even a
minor breach of traffic rules can result in an extraordinary licence being
Thomas Shepheard in his affidavit affirmed 27 June
Shepheard Affidavit) deposes that he is a director of Shepheard; Mr Tucci's
employer and that he provides this affidavit in
support of Mr Tucci's
Application. Attached to the First Shepheard Affidavit is a letter of support
from Mr Shepheard dated 24 June
2025 which states
operates a vacuum truck and transporting company servicing the southwest, Great
Southern, greater Perth area and Wheatbelt
regions of Western Australia.
has employed Mr Tucci since its inception in October 2022.
Mr Shepheard
is an integral part of Shepheard's team.
is employed on a full-time basis, and through consistent commitment and
performance, has progressed to his current role as
operations manager.
wishes to retain Mr Tucci as part of its workforce as he is a valuable and
experienced employee. Shepheard held Mr Tucci's
position open during his
recent period of imprisonment on that basis.
Shepheard has been able to keep Mr Tucci employed on limited interim duties
since his release from prison - such as yard work
and second operator positions
within Shepheard's trucks when required - these duties are not sustainable for
Shepheard's business
in the long term.
Mr Tucci does not have the ability to perform his usual full duties (which
requires that he holds a valid licence covering vehicle
classes from C through
to MC), Shepheard will be unable to continue employing him beyond the outcome of
this Application and would
need to hire a replacement.
hiring of a replacement for Mr Tucci by Shepheard would not be
straightforward due to the somewhat niche skill set which Shepheard
employees require and the fact that many potential employees are unwilling to be
on-call outside of standard business hours due to
other commitments.
to hire a replacement employee would result in a significant financial and
operational impact on Shepheard's business.
standard work hours are 5.00 am to 6.00 pm, Monday to Friday.
However, Shepheard operates 24 hours a day, seven days a
week, providing
essential services including emergency spill response, controlled waste
transport, high-pressure jetting and industrial
Shepheard's
clients include utility providers, mining operations, and local governments -
many of whom require immediate response
or work to be carried out outside normal
business hours.
is an operational need for Mr Tucci to have the flexibility to work the
24/7 nature of Shepheard's business. That his role
requires him to be on-call,
attend emergency call-outs, supervise after-hours operations, and step in to
provide truck driving coverage
at any time including nights, weekends and public
greatest distance Mr Tucci may be required to drive from Shepheard's depot
would be approximately 500 km.
operations manager, Mr Tucci is responsible for coordinating and overseeing
heavy vehicle logistics, site operations, staff and
service delivery.
duties also require conducting on-site supervision and safety assessments;
driving and operating multi-combination (MC)
vehicles in routing and emergency
situations; providing contingency coverage for unavailable drivers; and
personally ensuring compliance
with environmental and safety regulations during
transport of controlled waste and dangerous goods.
Shepheard and many of Shepheard's clients conduct random drug and alcohol
testing as part of standard safety protocol.
has never returned a positive result during the course of his employment and has
consistently complied with all occupational
health and safety requirements.
That Shepheard fully supports Mr Tucci's Application and is prepared
to comply with any reasonable
licence conditions imposed by this
Thomas Shepheard in his supplementary affidavit affirmed 9 September
Shepheard Affidavit) relevantly deposes that he is Mr Tucci's employer;
that he provides this supplementary affidavit in
support of Mr Tucci's
Application to be granted an extraordinary licence for work purposes; and that
having re-read his affidavit
dated 27 June 2025, which annexed
Mr Shepheard's letter dated 24 June 2025, he can confirm that the
contents of it remain true and
accurate as at the date of this affidavit.
Girometti, in her affidavit affirmed 2 July
Affidavit) deposes that she is Mr Tucci's long-term de facto partner and
that she provides this affidavit in support of
Mr Tucci's Application which
she supports fully. Attached to the Girometti Affidavit is a letter of support
Ms Girometti.
In the letter, Ms Girometti states that:
the past few months, the consequences of Mr Tucci's accident have had a
profound impact on their household.
inability to drive will cause considerable strain, not only on
Mr Tucci's mental health, but on their financial stability.
she is employed on a casual basis, their household income is limited and
inconsistent.
continued employment is crucial to his ability to meet their basic living
has been under significant stress at the prospect of losing his employment and
she has witnessed firsthand the toll this
has taken on Mr Tucci's
the 20 plus years she has known Mr Tucci, he has consistently demonstrated
himself to be an exemplary and responsible driver.
incident which led to the loss of Mr Tucci's licence was entirely out of
character and Ms Girometti knows that he deeply regrets
his actions.
believes that Mr Tucci is determined not to repeat the same mistake.
is concerned about Mr Tucci resorting to alternative means of travel, such
as riding a pushbike to work in circumstances where
the 10 km stretch along
Bussell Highway Mr Tucci would need to travel is unsafe for cyclists.
are no viable public transport options available to Mr Tucci and the local
taxi services in Margaret River are extremely limited
and unreliable making
them an impractical long-term solution for daily commuting.
Mr Tucci an extraordinary licence is essential for his continued
employment, wellbeing and safety.
Allegretti in his affidavit affirmed 2 July
(Allegretti
Affidavit) deposes that he is a long-term friend of
provides this affidavit in support of Mr Tucci's Application. Attached to
the Allegretti Affidavit is a letter of support from
Mr Allegretti dated
26 June 2025 provided by way of a character
letter, Mr Allegretti states that:
has known Mr Tucci for over 20 years having first met him in Italy and that
they remain close friends and fellow residents of the
Margaret River area.
sees Mr Tucci almost daily.
knows Mr Tucci to be a reliable, responsible and trustworthy individual and
a hardworking person with integrity.
extraordinary licence would enable Mr Tucci to continue meeting his work
obligations and maintain his financial stability.
has been a passenger in vehicles driven by Mr Tucci many times over the
years and has always found Mr Tucci to be a careful and
safe driver.
news of Mr Tucci receiving a driving-related conviction was genuinely
surprising as he had never regarded Mr Tucci's driving as
careless or
Hearing of the Application
Application proceeded to hearing on 12 September 2025. Both parties were
represented by counsel at the hearing of the Application.
Mr Tucci and his
counsel appeared at the hearing remotely via video and audio-link.
Application had initially been brought pursuant to the now repealed provision of
s 76(1) of the RTA. At the hearing of the Application
on 12 September
2025, counsel for Mr Tucci confirmed that the Application is brought
pursuant to
of the Act and I granted leave to amend the application to
reflect this.
The applicant's position
submits that his principal means of obtaining income is through his employment
with Shepheard.
to the matters deposed to in his affidavit, Mr Tucci, having been affirmed,
gave evidence at the hearing on 12 September
2025 in support of his
Application. Mr Tucci's evidence can be summarised as follows.
Tucci said that he was reliant on lifts from colleagues or his partner,
Ms Girometti, to get to and from work, from Margaret River
Okay, usually I go from Margaret River to Cowaramup(?) at this
stage with some of my colleague will pick me up and drop me off when
the shift. When they are not available, usually Lisa if he's free give me a
lift, or in other case I have to miss the
day because I can't get to work.
Regarding them - my colleague - they are not always available because probably
we have a different
shift. My boss, Jack(?), tried to put us in a same shift in
this way I can always have the lift to work and come back. That is
There is no other option, unfortunately, because to get from Margaret River
to Cowaramup, you have to take the bus on highway, which
doesn't have any
footpath to anything you can even ride a bike, even it it's 10-kilometre
stretch. But unfortunately it's the only
option have a lift.
said that in his view, it was not safe to ride a bike on Bussell
Mr Tucci confirmed that he does not drink alcohol or use illicit drugs and
is in very good
informed the court that time spent in prison following his conviction, whilst
not easy, allowed him to think about the best
he could do for the situation.
That was a really impact, and definite is not easy to spend
that time in prison, but allowed me to think about all the situation
fact that at least I tried to do the best I could for the situation. I'm really
sorry for the person, well his injury was
never my intention to injure anyone or
to leave the scene without actually checking the other person, and it's
something I will always
carry with me because I reckon never's going to go away.
But at this stage I just try to move on and try to do the right thing.
Hopefully never happen to anyone, the circumstance where you can't really
realise what's going on and just freak out or just panic
informed the court that since his release from prison he had been working with
Shepheard and that his employment is to be
terminated if the Application is not
Mr Tucci was cross-examined by counsel for the CEO and said that he has not
sought out other work at all, other than the truck driving
further informed the court that he worked as a chef in a restaurant in Margaret
River for five years in the past but terminated
that job because it was
stressful for
I terminated that job because was really stressful for -
for me. I couldn't take any more of that kind of stressful kind of the
environment. So I decide to move on and do something different. Yes?---And I -
I choose to move in this kind of the role. And
also because the - now is the
day, the cost of living raising up that much, doing hospitality kind of the job
is struggle you to
keep up with the expensive, so I had also to change for that
to the nature of his role as operations manager at Shepheard, Mr Tucci
explained that his work involved the
Okay. In my job basically, I take
all the - the calls from a customer, organise the shift for the crew. Also work
along with the
crew with some help. And I going around the - the sites to check
for - for the jobs, or for if the crew has some problem during
the job, try to
Also to - to, like, provide service, like, advice on the - kind of the different
issue can apply when the job is required. Also,
my job required some after-hour
callout, basically, to (indistinct). We had usually run during the normal hour,
but because we go
a bit overtime sometimes, we need - me and my boss, we need to
go out overtime to do some 24/7 kind of service. So that basically
position in - in the job.
confirmed that he did not have any specific qualifications for the role of
Not really, because what happened was, I start in this job, it
escalated my knowledge regarding - - - during the experience, so
to do a lot of hours, cos - - - my colleague can't do it, so for that reason, my
boss offered me the position as manager
- - - in the business.
to the after-hours nature of the work being performed by Mr Tucci for
TENNENT-BROWN, MR:
Thank you, your Honour. If I may just, perhaps,
direct one further question to Mr Tucci, just in terms of the after-hours
Mr Tucci, if you can explain for the benefit of the court
whether the after-hours work is regular, whether it's seasonal and so
So yeah, there are - there are callout. There is more kind
of the seasonal situation come up, and also season, but can - the more,
sort of, time is over winter when the raining filling up the septic tanks or
filling up the sewerage system, the (indistinct) sewerage
system. So up and -
quite often can - we have to go and do the job, do it in night-time and in
that seasonal particular job. So
just to clarify, it's fair to say that the
after-hours work isn't all the time, it's at certain times of year---Yeah, it is
at certain time of the year.
submits that determining what constitutes an applicant's principal means of
obtaining income requires an assessment of the
evidence put before the court.
No evidence was put to the court, including by way of cross-examination, as to
what specific alternative
employment opportunities may be available.
submits that where an applicant has a particular skill set acquired through
training, experience or a combination of both,
it would seem unorthodox for
a court to refuse an application solely on the basis that the applicant may be
able to obtain employment
in a different field of work with an alternative
employer which does not require driving in circumstances where they otherwise
the criteria for a grant with their existing employer.
submits that the court may, in an appropriate case, reconcile countervailing
considerations under
of the Act by imposing conditions that would
make the granting of an application appropriate:
provided a copy of his Western Australia criminal and traffic
than the offence, the record shows Mr Tucci having the following three
traffic infringements: 5 June 2018 - Exceed speed limit
in a speed zone by
10 km per hour but not more than 19 km per hour; 12 September
2017 - Exceed speed limit in a speed zone by not
more than 9 km per hour;
21 December 2016 - Exceed speed limit in a speed zone by 10 km per
hour but not more than 19 km per hour.
Mr Tucci deposes that he
otherwise has a clean
The CEO's position
for the CEO opposed the grant of an extraordinary licence on the following
that in relation to
of the Act, Mr Tucci must satisfy the
court with evidence that he will not only be deprived of his principal means of
obtaining an
income, but also that it will place an undue financial burden on
CEO submits that the question of whether Mr Tucci's failure to actively
seek alternative employment from the time he became aware
of the likely
disqualification undermines his claim of undue financial burden under
of the Act. This includes consideration of whether
Mr Tucci could have reasonably anticipated the impact of disqualification
taken steps to mitigate it as well as his ability to find alternative
employment in the event of him being disqualified.
CEO accepts that Mr Tucci will lose his current role with Shepheard who
continued to employ him, knowing that he did not have
a driver's licence after
his release from prison. However, the CEO submits that even if Mr Tucci
were to lose his current employment
with Shepheard, in circumstances
(a) Mr Tucci concedes that there is a critical shortage
of chefs in the Margaret River area and that he is qualified to do that
(b) Mr Tucci's has alternative means of obtaining an income at his
disposal, namely to work as a chef; and
(c) there is no evidence that Mr Tucci will suffer an undue financial
burden if he loses his current employment,
it is more probable than not that Mr Tucci will not suffer an undue
financial burden if he is not granted an extraordinary licence.
CEO submits that Mr Tucci's application for an extraordinary licence under
of the Act should be refused for the reasons of lack of evidence
that loss of work as a truck driver/operations manager would cause
financial burden and for reasons referred to in
The Director General of
CEO further submits that if the application under
fails, then the application pursuant to the provisions of
Act must fail since Mr Tucci would not need to drive to Shepheard's base
any longer.
counsel for the CEO submits that the breadth of the extraordinary licence sought
by Mr Tucci, if granted, would greatly
minimise the punitive aspects of the
disqualification. The CEO relies on the principles set out in
(as repeated in
) in support of the proposition
that a motor vehicle driver's licence is not a right, it is a privilege,
the continued maintenance
of which depends on avoidance of traffic offences, and
the punitive aspects of the disqualification are ordinarily considered under
nature of the offence giving rise to the disqualification criteria.
Counsel for Mr Tucci submits that the court may, in an appropriate
reconcile countervailing considerations under
of the Act by
imposing conditions that would make the granting of an application appropriate:
counsel for the CEO submits that whilst Mr Tucci was entitled to make the
Application at the time that he did, the consequence
of making an
application at the minimum period, meant that, effectively, he precluded court's
considerations, namely, the conduct
of the applicant subsequent to the
disqualification, such that this court is not able to attribute any weight to
that particular
the conclusion of the hearing, I made orders for the filing of further
submissions by both parties in respect of the timing of
the making of the
Application and addressing
of the Act, with submissions
being filed on 17 September 2025 and 22 September 2025 by the parties
respectively. Both parties filed
submissions in addition to the earlier
submissions filed on behalf of Mr Tucci dated 11 September
Issues for determination
following issues arise for determination:
proper construction of the words 'principal means of obtaining income' within
the meaning of
of the Act.
the refusal of the Application place an undue financial burden on Mr Tucci
by depriving him of his principal means of obtaining
income within the meaning
of the Act?
the refusal of the Application deprive Mr Tucci of the only practicable
means of travelling to and from the place he is employed
within the meaning of
of the Act?
Mr Tucci satisfied the mandatory statutory criteria set out in
of the Act?
Issue 1: Proper construction of the words 'principal means of obtaining income':
CEO submits that the question of whether Mr Tucci's failure to actively
seek alternative employment from the time he became aware
of the likely
disqualification undermines his claim of undue financial burden under
of the Act. This includes consideration of whether
Mr Tucci could have reasonably anticipated the impact
of disqualification and
taken steps to mitigate it as well as his ability
to find alternative employment in the event of him being
disqualified.
Disposition
is convenient here to construe
of the Act.
of the Act relevantly provides that the court must not make an order
directing the grant of an extraordinary licence unless it is
satisfied that the
refusal of the application would:
(b) place an undue financial burden on the applicant or his or her family, by
depriving the applicant of his or her principal means
of obtaining income;
Interpretation Act 1984
(WA) (Interpretation Act) provides that:
A written law shall be considered as always speaking and whenever a matter
or thing is expressed in the present tense, it shall be
applied to the
circumstances as they arise, so that effect may be given to every part of the
law according to its true sprit, intent
and meaning.
importance of statutory text to the exercise of statutory construction is well
established. The principles were summarised by
the Court of Appeal in
and that summary is repeated here for ease of reference.
Commissioner of Taxation v Consolidated Media Holdings
French CJ, Hayne, Crennan, Bell and Gageler JJ observed:
This Court has stated on many occasions that the task of statutory construction
must begin with a consideration of the [statutory]
Alumina Pty Ltd v Commissioner of Territory Revenue
[2009] HCA 41
(2009) 239 CLR 27
). So must the task of statutory construction end. The statutory text
must be considered in its context. That context includes
legislative history
and extrinsic materials. Understanding context has utility if, and in so far
as, it assists in fixing the meaning
of the statutory text. Legislative history
and extrinsic materials cannot displace the meaning of the statutory text. Nor
examination an end in itself.
primary object of statutory construction is to construe the relevant provision
so that it is consistent with the language and
purpose of all the provisions of
the statute. The statutory text is the surest guide to Parliament's intention.
The meaning of
the text may require consideration of the context, which includes
the general purpose and policy of the provision, in particular
the mischief it
is seeking to
context includes the existing state of the law, the history of the legislative
scheme and the mischief to which the statute is
purpose of legislation must be derived from the statutory text and not from any
assumption about the desired or desirable reach
or operation of the relevant
provisions.
intended reach of a legislative provision is to be discerned from the words of
the provision and not by making an
assumption about its
general principles concerning the circumstances in which words may be read into
legislation were summarised by this court in
Australian Unity Property Ltd
Those general principles are repeated as follows.
Taylor v The Owners - Strata Plan
High Court recognised that there are some circumstances in which purposive
construction may allow for the reading of a provision
as if it contained
additional words (or omitted words) with the effect of expanding its field of
operation. French CJ, Crennan and
The question whether the court is justified in reading a statutory provision as
if it contained additional words or omitted words
involves a judgment of matters
of degree. That judgment is readily answered in favour of addition or omission
in the case of simple,
grammatical, drafting errors which if uncorrected would
defeat the object of the provision. It is answered against a construction
fills 'gaps disclosed in legislation' or makes an insertion which is 'too big,
or too much at variance with the language in
fact used by the legislature'.
(citations omitted)
Honours referred to three conditions identified by Lord Diplock in
Wentworth Securities Ltd v
modified by Lord Nicholls in
Inco Europe Ltd v First Choice
Distribution
Those conditions were summarised by French CJ and Bell J in
Minister for
Immigration and Citizenship v SZJGV
Three matters of which the court must be sure before interpreting a statute in
this way were the intended purpose of the statute,
the failure of the draftsman
and parliament by inadvertence to give effect to that purpose, and the substance
of the provision parliament
would have made. The third of these conditions was
described as being of 'crucial importance'. Otherwise any attempt to
the meaning of the enactment would cross the boundary between
construction and legislation.
, French CJ, Crennan and Bell JJ went on to
... However, it is unnecessary to decide whether Lord Diplock's three conditions
are always, or even usually, necessary and sufficient.
This is because the task
remains the construction of the words the legislature has enacted. In this
respect it may not be sufficient
that 'the modified construction is reasonably
open having regard to the statutory scheme' because any modified meaning must be
with the language in fact used by the legislature. Lord Diplock
never suggested otherwise. Sometimes, as McHugh J observed in
City Council v GIO General Ltd
[1997] HCA 53
at 113], the
language of a provision will not admit of a remedial construction. Relevant for
present purposes was his Honour's further
observation, '[i]f the legislature
uses language which covers only one state of affairs, a court cannot
legitimately construe the
words of the section in a tortured and unrealistic
manner to cover another set of circumstances.'
Lord Diplock's speech in
Wentworth Securities
laid emphasis on the
task as construction and not judicial legislation. In
Inco Europe
Lord Nicholls of Birkenhead observed that even when Lord Diplock's conditions
are met, the court may be inhibited from interpreting
a provision in accordance
with what it is satisfied was the underlying intention of Parliament: the
alteration to the language of
the provision in such a case may be 'too
far-reaching'. In Australian law the inhibition on the adoption of a purposive
construction
that departs too far from the statutory text has an added dimension
because too great a departure may violate the separation of powers
Constitution
(some citations omitted)
term 'principal' is defined in the Oxford English Dictionary to
First or highest in rank; most important; foremost; greatest.
words 'principal means of obtaining income' arises from the text of
of the Act itself, and are expressed in the present tense. They
refer to a state of affairs that is extant at the time of that application.
Nothing in the words used in the subsection contemplate looking beyond the state
of affairs that is extant at the time of the application.
is worth observing that this approach is consistent with that of court in
Lenegan v Director General of the Department of
was in respect of the now repealed
the RTA, the decision considered the proper construction to be placed on
(relevantly)
s 76(3b)(b)
of the act as it then was and is substantially in
similar terms to
of the Act. As was observed by Staude DCJ in
What is in issue in this appeal is the proper construction to be placed on pars
(b) and (c). Looking firstly at par (b), an undue
financial burden is one which
is 'beyond what is warranted, excessive or disproportionate' (see the New
Shorter Oxford English Dictionary).
The meaning of the expression, 'depriving
him of his principal means of obtaining income', in the present context, is to
that person from doing his or her usual work.
This subsection therefore requires the court, if it thinks that the grant of a
licence is proper upon consideration of the factors
to make an order unless it is satisfied that refusal of the application would
have the effect of, in terms of par (b), imposing
a disproportionate financial
burden on the applicant by preventing him from doing his normal work.
Whether the refusal will have that effect in any case is a question of fact and
degree to be determined, having regard to all the
circumstances of the case.
The court must consider and decide whether the applicant is deprived of his or
her means of obtaining
income without an extraordinary licence.
If it is satisfied that the applicant would be so deprived, the court must look
at whether the effect of that is an undue financial
burden. A person who
can use public transport, or hire a driver, or whose work is such that
arrangements can be made to enable them
to continue to work without a licence to
drive, will not be deprived of their principal means of obtaining income or, in
those circumstances,
may not otherwise suffer an undue financial
this case, the CEO does not contend that Mr Tucci is not employed by
Shepheard. Nor does the CEO contend that Mr Tucci is employed
by any other
employer other than Shepheard. Further, the CEO accepts that Mr Tucci
will lose his current role with Shepheard if
he is not granted an extraordinary
the CEO contends that Mr Tucci has
an alternative means of obtaining an
at his disposal because he has worked as a chef in the past, there is
no suggestion by the CEO that Mr Tucci is employed as a chef
at present and
that this is Mr Tucci's usual work.
my view, the legislative text of
accommodate the CEO's contention that the question of whether an applicant's
'principal means of obtaining income' includes a consideration
of whether the
applicant has actively sought alternative employment.
would seem on an ordinary reading of
of the Act, the court hearing an
application for an extraordinary licence holds a jurisdiction to either make an
order directing
the CEO to grant the applicant an extraordinary licence or to
refuse the application. It is established that the effect of
the Act is that the court is prohibited from making an order under
directing the CEO to grant to the applicant an extraordinary
licence unless the court is satisfied that the refusal of the application
would have the consequence specified in
s 30(4)(c).
an application is made pursuant to
of the Act, it is for
the applicant to satisfy the court that refusal of the application would place
an undue financial burden on
the applicant or his or her family, by depriving
the applicant of his or her principal means of obtaining income. This
requires the court to consider the question in the present context
and having regard to the applicant's usual means of obtaining
is for the court to form a view as to whether the applicant has satisfied
of the Act by having regard to the evidence before the court.
Issue 2: Undue financial burden on the applicant by depriving him of his
principal means of obtaining income:
CEO contends that Mr Tucci would not suffer an undue financial burden even
if he were to lose his current employment with Shepheard
as he has an
alternative means of obtaining an income at his disposal, namely to work as a
chef. In support of this, the CEO points
to the critical shortage of chefs in
the Margaret River area, and submits that Mr Tucci is qualified to do that
CEO opposes this ground of the Application on this basis.
evidence is adduced as to the income Mr Tucci would be said to receive if
he were able to secure such alternative employment;
and whether there would
be a need to travel to and from the place of hypothetical
employment.
Disposition
noted in my findings above, the legislative text of
itself cannot accommodate the CEO's contention that the question of whether an
applicant's 'principal means of obtaining
income' includes a consideration of
whether the applicant has actively sought alternative employment.
this case, to satisfy the requirements of
of the Act, it is
necessary for Mr Tucci to satisfy the court on the basis of the evidence
(a) Mr Tucci's employment with Shepheard is his principal
means of obtaining income;
(b) refusing the grant of an extraordinary licence would deprive
Mr Tucci of his principal means of obtaining income; and
(c) this would place an undue financial burden on Mr Tucci or his
evidence before this court is as follows:
Mr Tucci is employed as operations manager for
as operations manager Mr Tucci is required to drive a truck and is
responsible for coordinating and overseeing heavy vehicle
logistics, site
operations, staff and service delivery for
Mr Tucci's standard work hours are 5.00 am to 6.00 pm, Monday to
Friday, but that there is an operational need for Mr Tucci to
flexibility to work the 24/7 nature of Shepheard's work within a 500 km
radius from Shepheard's
while Shepheard has been able to keep Mr Tucci employed on limited interim
duties since his release from prison - such as yard
work and second operator
positions within Shepheard's trucks when required - these duties are not
sustainable for Shepheard's business
in the long
if Mr Tucci does not have the ability to perform his usual full duties
(which requires that he holds a valid licence covering
vehicle classes from C
through to MC), Shepheard will be unable to continue employing him beyond the
outcome of the
Application.
Mr Tucci's current net weekly base income is approximately $1,250 and his
weekly expenses are approximately
a refusal of the grant of an extraordinary licence would place an undue
financial burden on Mr Tucci and his partner,
Ms Girometti.
as Ms Girometti is employed on a casual basis, their household income
is limited and
inconsistent.
Mr Tucci's continued employment is crucial to his ability to meet their
basic living
set out in his affidavit his financial position. Included into evidence as
Exhibit 2 is an ANZ transaction report in the
joint account of Mr Tucci and
Ms Girometti for the period 6 May 2025 to 3 September 2025 which
was the subject of cross-examination.
The evidence of Mr Tucci and
Ms Girometti is that Mr Tucci will suffer an undue financial burden if
he loses his current employment
with Shepheard.
was not put to Mr Tucci in cross-examination that his evidence in respect
of any of the matters the subject of the Application
could not be relied on by
the court or was otherwise objectionable.
accept Mr Tucci as a credible witness. Further, I accept Mr Tucci's
reasoning for his career change and his evidence in this regard.
the counsel for the CEO did not seek to cross-examine any of the other witnesses
respective affidavits and I accept the
evidence of each of Ms Girometti, Mr Shepheard and
Mr Allegretti.
has been employed by Shepheard on a full-time basis since its inception
in October 2022 and through consistent commitment
and performance, has
progressed to his current role as operations manager and is an integral part of
the Shepheard team despite not
having any specific qualifications for the role.
The evidence before this court is that Mr Tucci's role as operations
Shepheard is his principal means of obtaining income and requires
that he be able to drive in order to undertake his work. As such,
accept the CEO's contention that loss of work as a truck driver/operations
manager would not cause Mr Tucci an undue financial
the Application were granted, I am satisfied that Shepheard would employ
Mr Tucci on a full-time basis with Mr Tucci's standard
being 5.00 am to 6.00 pm Monday to Friday and that the greatest
distance Mr Tucci may be required to drive from Shepheard's
depot would be
approximately
accept that the nature of work undertaken by Shepheard means that Shepheard
operates 24 hours a day, seven days a week, providing
essential services
including emergency spill response, controlled waste transport, high-pressure
jetting and industrial
Whilst Mr Shepheard deposes in the First Shepheard Affidavit that there is an
operational need for Mr Tucci to have the flexibility
to work the 24/7
nature of Shepheard's business, in the context of the on-call aspect of the
work, express reference is made by Mr
Shepheard to Mr Tucci having to
specifically provide truck driving coverage at any time including nights,
weekends and public
having had regard to Mr Tucci's evidence at the hearing on
12 September 2025, it cannot be said that the after-hours nature
work being performed by Mr Tucci is a constant and ongoing need given on
Mr Tucci's own evidence this type of after-hours
work is seasonal in nature
(ie winter months) and is not required to be undertaken all the
have also had regard to the evidence that there are other employees of Shepheard
who are colleagues of
on the evidence before this court, it cannot be said that Mr Tucci is the
only employee of Shepheard able to meet all of
Shepheard's operational needs.
However, I balance this with the evidence of Mr Tucci that as operations
manager, his role is such
that it is necessary for him to take all the calls
from a customer, organise the shift for the crew and work along with the crew
with some help including going around the sites to check the jobs and assist
crew as required which sometimes involves needing to
go out overtime as a 24/7
this case, there is no challenge to the evidence that the demands of
Mr Tucci's job are such that he needs to be available on-call,
attend emergency call-outs, supervise after-hours operations, and step in
to provide truck driving coverage (covering an approximately
500 km radius
from Shepheard's depot in Margaret River) at any time including nights, weekends
and public holidays with an operational
need for Mr Tucci to have the
flexibility to work the 24/7 nature of Shepheard's business.
the basis of the evidence, I am satisfied that Mr Tucci's employment with
Shepheard is his principal means of obtaining income
such that refusing the
grant of an extraordinary licence would deprive Mr Tucci of his principal
means of obtaining income and would
place an undue financial burden on
Mr Tucci and his partner, Ms Girometti.
Issue 3: Only practicable means of travelling to and from the place at which the
applicant is employed:
CEO opposes this ground of the Application and submits that if the application
of the Act fails, then the application pursuant to the
provisions of
of the Act must fail since Mr Tucci would not
need to drive to Shepheard's base any longer.
evidence was submitted by the CEO that Mr Tucci could make other
arrangements to travel to and from Shepheard's depot by using
taxis, public
transport or other means of travel.
Disposition
is for the court to satisfy itself that the refusal of the application would
have the consequence specified in par (a) or par
the CEO's assertion that
must fail on the assumption that
of the Act fails does not follow and in any event is not made
out in light of my findings above.
found that refusal of the Application would place an undue financial burden on
Mr Tucci by depriving him of his principal
means of obtaining income within
the meaning of
of the Act, I have, for completeness, also
considered the Application pursuant to
of the Act.
, the Court of Appeal held that the consequence specified
will not be made out unless the court is satisfied that the
refusal of the application (in other words, the refusal to authorise
applicant to drive a motor vehicle) would, relevantly, deprive the applicant of
the 'only practicable means' of travelling to
and from his or her place of
employment and went on to observe as
The meaning of the word 'practicable' depends, to a significant extent, on the
context, but it ordinarily connotes that which is
reasonably feasible or
reasonably capable of being put into practice, done or accomplished. See
Shorter Oxford English Dictionary
(6th ed, 2007) 2310; Macquarie Dictionary (5th
ed, 2009) 1305.
, the word 'practicable', in the context of 'depriving the
applicant ... of the only practicable means' of travelling to and from
at which the applicant is employed, contemplates factual differences between
applicants according to each applicant's personal
circumstances. It is
necessary to address what is 'practicable' for the particular applicant and not
what is 'practicable' for a
hypothetical reasonable person.
Court of Appeal in
stated that ordinarily,
the relevant facts and circumstances would include, for
(a) the circumstances of the applicant's employment including the nature of his
or her place of employment;
(b) the nature of the journey or journeys which the applicant must undertake in
travelling to and from his or her place of employment;
(c) the duration of the journey or journeys by the means of transport being
considered;
(d) the timing and frequency of the means of transport being considered;
(e) the cost of undertaking the journey or journeys by the means of transport
being considered; and
(f) the applicant's financial capacity to pay for the cost of undertaking the
journey or journeys by the means of transport being
considered.
Court of Appeal went on to state that the above list was not an exhaustive
statement of the facts and circumstances that ordinarily
might be relevant to a
particular case. The Court of Appeal stated
The correct approach is for the court to evaluate separately each available
transport option (if any), apart from driving a motor
vehicle, in the context of
the statutory scheme and all the relevant facts and circumstances, including the
applicant's personal
circumstances, and to make a judgment as to whether the
transport option under consideration would be a 'practicable means' (that
reasonably feasible means), in the context of the statutory scheme and all the
relevant facts and circumstances including the
applicant's personal
circumstances, for the applicant to travel to and from his or her place of
employment.
Section 30(4)(c)
refers to 'travelling to ... the place at which the applicant
... is employed', but does not expressly identify the place where the
begins. Similarly,
refers to 'travelling ... from the place at
which the applicant ... is employed', but does not expressly identify the place
the journey ends.
These express omissions reflect, no doubt, the reality that an applicant's point
of departure, when travelling to the place at which
he or she is employed, and
an applicant's point of destination, when travelling from the place at which he
or she is employed, will
not necessarily be the applicant's usual residence. An
applicant may not have a single, fixed place of employment. For example,
an applicant may have two part-time jobs each day at different locations.
It may be necessary for the applicant to travel directly
from one location to
evidence of Mr Tucci in this regard was to the effect that:
roads Mr Tucci has to travel on are not suitable for riding a bike
(bicycle) to and from work safely at the times he needs to
travel (which are
often in the dark) due to being frequented by heavy vehicles and having limited
shoulder space for
River only has a limited taxi service and can offer no assurance of being
available at the times Mr Tucci may need it to
be able to get to and from
does not earn enough to a pay a driver to get him to and from
being released from prison, Mr Tucci has relied on Ms Girometti and
others to drive him from his home to the work depot and
then drive a truck to
the site of the
Mr Tucci is unable to rely on Ms Girometti or colleagues to give him a
lift, he has to miss the day because he is unable to travel
my view, having had regard to the evidence available, I am satisfied that the
refusal of the grant of an extraordinary licence
would deprive Mr Tucci of
the only practicable means of travelling to and from the place at which
Mr Tucci is employed within the
Issue 4: Mandatory relevant considerations:
are five mandatory factors to consider in
of the Act, namely: (a)
the safety of the public generally; (b) the character of Mr Tucci; (c) the
circumstances of the case; (d)
the nature of the offence or offences giving rise
to the disqualification; and (e) the conduct of Mr Tucci subsequent to the
disqualification.
of these is addressed below.
Safety of the public generally
convenient starting point in assessing the safety of the public generally is to
have regard to the circumstances of the offending,
which I have set out in
detail earlier in these reasons.
offence occurred in circumstances where Mr Tucci inadvertently ran over
Mr Jones who was 'sleeping rough' whilst driving into
the Site in a
Mitsubishi tanker truck. The Site has no
the offence occurred in the early hours of the morning, at about
Mr Jones was lying on his back on the hardstand, partially covered by a
sleeping bag
and Mr Tucci deposed he had not seen Mr Jones as his truck headlights
had not illuminated Mr Jones' location as his truck swung around
was a plainly dangerous act, affecting public safety.
However, Mr Tucci was not travelling at speed, having turned into the
before stopping his truck and reversing back out again in order to
turn around.
is also relevant that Mr Tucci has no prior convictions. He has however
received certain traffic infringements, none of which
are of specific
significance in the context of having any similarity to the nature of the
driving that was the subject of the offence
of which Mr Tucci was
Mr Tucci stopped the truck and got out, he ultimately did not assist
Mr Jones and simply drove
injuries sustained by Mr Jones as a result of Mr Tucci's driving are
significant - Mr Jones sustained multiple pelvic fractures,
6% body burns,
and required surgery and skin
Mr Tucci had not reported the incident to the WA
on the following day, identify himself to WA Police as a result of a media
broadcast regarding the
pleaded guilty to the offence.
noted above, Mr Tucci deposed amongst other things, that:
had not seen Mr Jones as his truck headlights had not illuminated
Mr Jones' location as his truck swung around in the course of
was not suggested that he was driving in a careless or dangerous manner, but
rather, that he failed to stop for long enough to
ensure that Mr Jones was
pleaded guilty to the offence.
had three traffic infringements and up until the conviction leading to his
current disqualification, he otherwise had a 'clean'
offence did not involve drugs or alcohol.
does not drink alcohol and has not done so for many years.
does not use non-prescription drugs.
being released from prison, he has completed a Traffic Offender
Intervention
provided him with further insight into, amongst other things, the seriousness of
road trauma and the impact on other people
who have to deal with it.
granted an extraordinary licence, he would take every precaution to ensure that
he complies with any conditions imposed upon it,
and understands that even a
minor breach of traffic rules can result in an extraordinary licence being
spent in prison following his conviction, whilst not easy, allowed him to think
and that it had a real impact (on
am mindful that Mr Tucci had only been employed by Shepheard for a
relatively short period of time prior to the incident occurring
on 15 March
2023. However, I have also had regard to the evidence of Ms Girometti and
Mr Allegretti, both of whom have known Mr
Tucci for a period of some
20 years and depose to Mr Tucci being a responsible, careful and safe
driver. I have also had regard
to the available evidence as to Mr Tucci's
driving history as it appears from his Western Australia criminal and traffic
Mr Tucci's own
had regard to each of these matters, and the circumstances of the offence
itself, which, without diminishing the seriousness
of the offence, did not occur
when Mr Tucci was driving at speed or under the influence of drugs or
alcohol, on balance, I am satisfied
that Mr Tucci presents a low risk to
the safety of the public generally if he returns to driving trucks on the road
in a work context.
The character of the applicant
Ms Girometti and Mr Allegretti provided evidence as to Mr Tucci's
character in the context of having known Mr Tucci for a significant
of time. Ms Girometti is Mr Tucci's long-term de facto partner
who has known Mr Tucci for some 20 plus years and Mr Allegretti
his long-term friend of some 20 years.
speak well of Mr Tucci. Mr Allegretti deposed in the Allegretti
Affidavit that he knows Mr Tucci to be a reliable, responsible
trustworthy individual and a hardworking person with integrity; and that he has
always found Mr Tucci to be a careful and safe
driver such that the news of
Mr Tucci receiving a driving-related conviction was genuinely surprising as
he had never regarded Mr
Tucci's driving as careless or
Mr Allegretti
deposed that he has himself been a passenger in vehicles driven by Mr Tucci
many times over the years and has always
found Mr Tucci to be a careful and
Mr Shepheard
in the First Shepheard Affidavit deposed that Mr Tucci is a valuable and
experienced employee.
am mindful that following the incident, whilst Mr Tucci stopped the truck
and got out, he ultimately did not assist Mr Jones and
simply drove
Mr Tucci and Mr Jones have a different recollection of the exchange
that occurred at that point. Importantly, there is the evidence
Mr Matwiejew and Mr Hughes as to hearing screams (coming from
Mr Jones), and this in combination with the injuries sustained by
Mr Jones as a result of Mr Tucci's driving suggest that it is unlikely
that Mr Jones 'was okay' contrary to what Mr Tucci says.
I am equally
mindful that Mr Tucci did ultimately, on the following day, identify
himself to WA Police and pleaded guilty to the
offence and was convicted for
failing to stop and assist in circumstances of grievous bodily harm, contrary to
of the RTA.
the hearing of the Application, Mr Tucci said that 'Hopefully never happen
to anyone, the circumstance where you can't really
realise what's going on and
just freak out or just panic
take into account that Mr Tucci has no criminal record other than for the
offence the subject of the incident. As has already
been observed,
Mr Tucci had committed certain driving offences which had been the subject
of infringements before the offence. While
these matters may in certain
respects be seen to go to his character, I consider that against Mr Tucci's
otherwise good driving record
and his positive character and hard-working nature
as supported by the matters deposed to by each of Ms Girometti,
Mr Allegretti
and Mr Shepheard.
the circumstances of the offence did not involve drugs or alcohol, I also take
into account Mr Shepheard's evidence that both
Shepheard and many of
Shepheard's clients conduct random drug and alcohol testing as part of standard
safety protocols and that Mr
Tucci has never returned a positive result
during the course of his employment and has consistently complied with all
occupational
health and safety requirements.
also provided by way of evidence a recent set of blood tests (including for
liver function) through his general practitioner,
and deposed that he does not drink alcohol and has not done so for many years
and does not use non-prescription drugs.
I take into account the fact that since his release from prison, Mr Tucci
has completed a Traffic Offender Intervention
provided him with further insight into, amongst other things, the seriousness of
road trauma and the impact on other people
who have to deal with it.
accept that Mr Tucci has learned from that, and shown remorse for his
conduct and insight in relation to the commission of the
offence and having
regard for the law. Mr Tucci gave evidence at the hearing that the time
spent in prison following his conviction
had a real impact on him and allowed
him to think about the situation. Mr Tucci expressed being sorry for
Mr Jones as well as his
injury and says that it is something that he will
always carry with him because it is never going to go away.
regard to the above materials and the evidence in this matter, I am satisfied
that Mr Tucci is a person of good character
and has adequately addressed
any character concerns arising from his driving offence and traffic
infringements. This factor weighs
in favour of the grant of the
Application.
Circumstances of the case
have set out in detail above my findings in relation to the overall
circumstances of the case, in particular, in relation to the
circumstances of Mr Tucci and the undue financial burden on him and
Ms Girometti if the Application is refused by depriving
Mr Tucci of
his principal means of obtaining income and to travel to and from the place at
which Mr Tucci is employed.
CEO submits that the breadth of the extraordinary licence sought by
Mr Tucci, if granted, would have greatly minimised the punitive
the disqualification. The CEO relies on the principles set out in
(as repeated in
) in support of
this. These matters are relevant to the nature of the offence giving rise to
the disqualification and I have addressed
them below in relation to that
consideration. I accept that, to an extent, those considerations overlap with
consideration of the
overall circumstances of the case. Taking those matters
into account, I nevertheless consider that the overall circumstances still
strongly in favour of the Application being granted.
Nature of the offence giving rise to the disqualification
have already set out my findings in relation to the nature and circumstances of
the offence giving rise to the disqualification
and its objective seriousness.
The offence occurred whilst Mr Tucci was driving the truck in a
work-related context but did not
occur whilst Mr Tucci was driving at speed
or whilst he was under the influence of drugs or alcohol. The circumstances of
the offence
were such that in driving into the hardstand area of the unlit Site,
Mr Tucci reversed back out again and over Mr Jones who was 'sleeping
rough' and partially covered by a sleeping bag.
accept that the circumstances in which the offence occurred were inadvertent in
that Mr Tucci did not intend to reverse his truck
over Mr Jones.
However, as a result of failing to stop and assist Mr Jones, Mr Tucci
was convicted of grievous bodily harm, contrary
of the RTA.
CEO contends that, in effect, the Application has been brought too soon and if
granted would undermine the punitive aspect of
the disqualification.
McKechnie J observed in
, a licence is a not a right but a
privilege, the continued maintenance of which depends on the avoidance of
may also be accepted that a period of disqualification may in part have punitive
as protective aspects.
an extraordinary licence is granted to an applicant, it may reduce the so called
'punitive aspects' of a disqualification. As
the Court of Appeal observed in
, these are not expressly referred to in
the Act, but they will ordinarily be an integral part of the 'nature of the
offence or offence giving rise to the disqualification',
s 30(2)(d).
nature, extent and significance of any potential resulting reduction in any
punitive aspects will depend on the circumstances
of the case. Matters that may
be relevant to that assessment include, but are not limited to, the length
of the disqualification
imposed, the period of the disqualification that has
been served, the minimum period before which an application may be made, and
scope of any proposed extraordinary licence and conditions to which it may be
that is only one consideration to be weighed against all other considerations in
the overall exercise of the
discretion.
the reduction in any punitive aspects may have been considered of significance
in the particular circumstances of one case,
does not mean it will have the same
significance in the circumstances of a different
observed by Sefton DCJ in
In cases such as
periods of two-year disqualifications had been served by the applicant to the
period served by Mr McGree in this case.
That was considered to be of
particular significance in the circumstances of those cases. It does not
necessarily follow, as the
CEO appeared to contend, that the same level of
significance arises in this case. It does not, in my view, follow that in a
where slightly over a quarter of the period of disqualification has been
served it is necessarily a strong countervailing factor
or that it necessitates
a conclusion that an application should be refused. It depends on weighing
up all the circumstances.
(footnotes omitted)
I consider that if the Application is granted it will reduce the significance of
any punitive aspects of the disqualification,
that will be ameliorated by the
scope of the licence and appropriate conditions that I identify below. Further,
Mr Tucci will still
be significantly restricted in his ability to drive.
He has been, and will continue to be, affected by punitive aspects of the
disqualification,
even if the Application is granted.
overall the nature of the offence and this related aspect are significant and
weigh against the exercise of the discretion,
in my view they are strongly
outweighed by other considerations in this case.
Conduct of the applicant subsequent to the disqualification
set out above, Mr Tucci was sentenced to 16 months' imprisonment, of which
four months were served immediately (from 10 February
2025) and 12 months suspended until 10 June 2026. Mr Tucci was
released on parole and made the Application on 7 July
CEO does not contend that the Application was brought contrary to
the Act. Rather, the CEO submits that whilst Mr Tucci was entitled to make
the Application at the time that he did, the consequence
of making an
application at the minimum period, meant that, effectively, he precluded court's
considerations, namely, the conduct
of the applicant subsequent to the
disqualification, such that this court is not able to attribute any weight to
that particular
the period since the disqualification took effect following Mr Tucci's
release on parole, he has not driven or committed any offences.
That counts
slightly in favour of the grant of the application but is overall a relatively
neutral consideration.
am satisfied that the refusal of the Application would:
(a) place an
undue financial burden on Mr Tucci by depriving him of his principal means
of obtaining income within the meaning of
of the Act; and
(b) deprive Mr Tucci of the only practicable means of travelling to and
from the place at which he is employed within the meaning
weighing up the preceding considerations, I am satisfied that it is appropriate
to exercise my discretion to grant the Application
subject to appropriate
conditions to the following effect:
Mr Tucci may not drive other than:
(a) a vehicle of
class MC, HC, HR, MR, LR, C, CA;
(b) for the purpose of driving only in the course of his employment with
Shepheard Pty Ltd and for the purpose of travelling from
his residence to his
place of employment at Shepheard Pty Ltd's depot, 19 Ryans Road, Margaret
(c) seven days a week and 24 hours per day;
(d) for a maximum driving period of 10 hours per day; and
(e) within a 500 km radius of the Busselton Courthouse.
Mr Tucci is to carry the extraordinary licence at all times whilst in
control of a motor vehicle and to produce it on demand
by any police
Mr Tucci is to display 'E' plates on both the front and rear of the
vehicle, of the same type and dimensions and in the same
manner as 'L' plates
provided for in the
Road Traffic (Authorisation to Drive) Regulations 2014
Mr Tucci is to have in his possession evidence of a logbook, completed in
advance of any journey, the shift roster or shift rostering
with the date, time,
vehicle, destination and purpose of that journey able to be produced on demand
to a police officer or otherwise
provide confirmation that the purpose of the
driving is only employment related.
Mr Tucci is not to have a blood-alcohol content above 0.00 at any time
while driving a motor vehicle.
Mr Tucci is to provide to the CEO a completed medical assessment
certificate (A Fitness to Drive M107A) before any extraordinary
issued by the CEO.
my view those conditions would also significantly ameliorate any countervailing
considerations including those arising as a result
of the nature of the offence
and any impact on any punitive aspects of the resulting disqualification.
will allow the Application and order that the CEO, on payment of the prescribed
fee, grant to the applicant an extraordinary licence
for a period of
12 months subject to conditions to the above effect.
certify that the preceding paragraph(s) comprise the reasons for decision of the
District Court of Western Australia.
10 NOVEMBER 2025
Affidavit of
Vincenzo Tucci affirmed 2 July 2025 (Tucci Affidavit), page 8, Attachment C,
Amended Statement of Material Facts, pars
disqualification was imposed by this court, the Application was required to be
made to this court:
Director General of Department of Transport v McKenzie
[52] (Buss P, with whom Murphy JA & Beech J agreed)
[68] (Buss P, Murphy JA & Beech J
McGree v The Chief Executive Officer of the Department of
[2024] WADC 96
[65] - [66],
Affidavit, page 8, Attachment C, Amended Statement of Material Facts, par
Affidavit, page 8, Attachment C, Amended Statement of Material Facts, par
Affidavit, page 8, Attachment C, Amended Statement of Material Facts, par
Affidavit, page 8, Attachment C, Amended Statement of Material Facts, par
Affidavit, page 9, Attachment C, Amended Statement of Material Facts, par
Affidavit, page 9, Attachment C, Amended Statement of Material Facts, par
Affidavit, page 9, Attachment C, Amended Statement of Material Facts, par
Affidavit, page 9, Attachment C, Amended Statement of Material Facts, par
Affidavit, page 9, Attachment C, Amended Statement of Material Facts, pars 4, 10
Affidavit, page 10, Attachment C, Amended Statement of Material Facts, par
Affidavit, page 9, Attachment C, Amended Statement of Material Facts, par
Affidavit, page 10, Attachment C, Amended Statement of Material Facts, par
Affidavit, page 9, Attachment C, Amended Statement of Material Facts, par
Affidavit, page 10, Attachment C, Amended Statement of Material Facts, par
Exhibit 1 admitted into evidence at the hearing of the
Application.
Tucci Affidavit, page 1, par
Affidavit, page 1, par
Affidavit, pages 1 - 2, par
Affidavit, page 2, par
Affidavit, page 2, par
Affidavit, page 2, par
Affidavit, page 2, par
Affidavit, page 2, par
Affidavit, Attachment B, page
Affidavit, page 2, par
Affidavit, page 2, par
Affidavit, Attachment E, pages 12 -
Affidavit, page 2, par
Affidavit, page 2, par
Affidavit, page 2, par
Affidavit, page 2, par
Affidavit, page 3, par
Affidavit, page 3, par
Affidavit, page 3, par
Affidavit, page 3, par
Affidavit, page 3, par
Affidavit, page 3, par
Affidavit, page 3, par
Affidavit, page 3, par
Affidavit, pages 3 - 4, par
Affidavit, page 4, par
Affidavit, page 4, par
Affidavit, page 4, par
Affidavit, page 4, par
Affidavit, Attachment D, page
Affidavit, page 4, par
Affidavit, page 4, par
Affidavit, page 4, par
Affidavit, page 4, par
Exhibit 3 admitted into evidence at the hearing of the
Application.
First Shepheard Affidavit, Annexure A, page
Exhibit 4 admitted into evidence at the hearing of the
Application.
Being Exhibit 5 admitted into evidence at the hearing of the
Application.
Girometti Affidavit, Annexure A, page
Exhibit 6 admitted into evidence at the hearing of the
Application.
Allegretti Affidavit, par
Affidavit, Annexure A, page
of hearing of Application on 12 September 2025 (ts), page
Affidavit, par 18; Attachment A, pages 6 -
Affidavit, par
Italiano v The Director General of Transport
[1999] WASCA 40
(1999) 29 MVR 249
Commissioner of Taxation v Consolidated Media Holdings Ltd
(2012) 250 CLR 503
[39]. See also
Saeed v Minister for
Immigration and Citizenship
[2010] HCA 23
(2010) 241 CLR 252
(French CJ, Gummow, Hayne, Crennan & Kiefel JJ);
Thiess v Collector of
[2014] HCA 12
(2014) 250 CLR 664
[22] (French CJ, Hayne,
Kiefel, Gageler & Keane
Project Blue Sky Inc v Australian Broadcasting Authority
(1998) 194 CLR 355
[69] (McHugh, Gummow, Kirby & Hayne JJ);
Alcan (NT) Alumina Pty Ltd v Commissioner of Territory Revenue
[2009] HCA 41
(2009) 239 CLR 27
[47] (Hayne, Heydon, Crennan &
Kiefel JJ).
CIC Insurance Ltd v Bankstown Football Club Ltd
[1997] HCA 2
(1997) 187 CLR 384
, 408 (Brennan CJ, Dawson, Toohey & Gummow
Certain Lloyd's Underwriters Subscribing to Contract No IH00AAQS v
[2012] HCA 56
(2012) 248 CLR 378
[26] (French CJ & Hayne
Minister for Employment and Workplace Relations v Gribbles Radiology Pty
[2005] HCA 9
(2005) 222 CLR 194
[21] (Gleeson CJ, Hayne, Callinan
Australian Unity Property Ltd v City of Busselton
[2018] WASCA 38
[87] - [91].
Taylor v The Owners - Strata Plan 11564
[2014] HCA 9
Wentworth Securities Ltd v Jones
[1980] AC 74
Inco Europe Ltd v First Choice Distribution (a firm)
[2000] UKHL 15
[2000] 1 WLR
[2000] 2 All ER 109
Minister for Immigration and Citizenship v SZJGV
[2009] HCA 40
(2009) 238 CLR 642
Lenegan v Director General of the Department of Transport
Exhibit 1 admitted into evidence at the hearing of the
Application.
First Shepheard Affidavit, Annexure A, page
Shepheard Affidavit, Annexure A, page
Shepheard Affidavit, Annexure A, page
Shepheard Affidavit, Annexure A, page
Exhibit 1 admitted into evidence at the hearing of the
Application.
Girometti Affidavit, Annexure A, page
Girometti Affidavit, Annexure A, page
Girometti Affidavit, Annexure A, page
Shepheard Affidavit, Annexure A, page
Shepheard Affidavit, Annexure A, page
Shepheard Affidavit, Annexure A, page
Exhibit 1 admitted into evidence at the hearing of the
Application.
Being Exhibit 1 admitted into evidence at the hearing of the
Application.
Being Exhibit 1 admitted into evidence at the hearing of the
Application.
Affidavit, page 8, Attachment C, Amended Statement of Material Facts, par
Affidavit, page 8, Attachment C, Amended Statement of Material Facts, par
Affidavit, page 8, Attachment C, Amended Statement of Material Facts, par
Exhibit 1 admitted into evidence at the hearing of the
Application.
Tucci Affidavit, page 9, Attachment C, Amended Statement of Material Facts, par
Affidavit, page 9, Attachment C, Amended Statement of Material Facts, par
Affidavit, page 9, Attachment C, Amended Statement of Material Facts, par
Affidavit, page 9, Attachment C, Amended Statement of Material Facts, par
Affidavit, page 10, Attachment C, Amended Statement of Material Facts, par
Affidavit, Attachment D, page
Affidavit, par 18; Attachment A, pages 6 -
Exhibit 6 admitted into evidence at the hearing of the
Application.
Being Exhibit 6 admitted into evidence at the hearing of the
Application.
Tucci Affidavit, page 9, Attachment C, Amended Statement of Material Facts, par
Affidavit, Attachment E, pages 12 -
Affidavit, Attachment D, page
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (711 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter