URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WABDT/2011/76.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:55:39
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
DARRAGH MELVIN and HOLLY CAMPBELL-POPE and LUTON HOLDINGS PTY LTD (Decision O.19513 & B.19921) [2011] WABDT 76 (7 October 2011)
BUILDING DISPUTES TRIBUNAL
J R CRIDDLE
(Deputy Chairperson
(Builder Member)
(Consumer Member)
1 & 2 SEPTEMBER 2011
ORDERS ISSUED:
7 OCTOBER 2011
WRITTEN REASONS
7 OCTOBER 2011
COMPLAINT NO.:
O.19513 & B.19921
DARRAGH MELVIN & HOLLY CAMPBELL-POPE
LUTON HOLDINGS PTY LTD
CATCHWORDS:
Builders’ Registration Act 1939
Building Contracts Act 1991 s17; Provisional Sum; Claim for Interest
REASONS FOR DECISION
dispute arises out of a lump sum building contract between the Owners and the
Builder for renovation works to be carried out at
the Owners’ existing
dwelling at 3 Jordan Street Cloverdale for a contract price of $121,770.00. The
contract was entered into
January 2009. The contract is
set out at pages 112 to 122 of the Tribunal’s book of papers.
Complaint has been issued by the Owners seeking contractual relief in relation
to a number of matters and claims pursuant to
Section 12A
Registration Act 1939
alleging faulty workmanship in the construction of the
Builder has issued a Complaint claiming the alleged outstanding balance payable
under the contract of $4,159.07 together with
a claim for interest on late
payment of $538.87 at 14%.
Complaints have been the subject of a number of directions hearings before
Deputy Registrar Aitkin. A determination has been
made by Deputy Chairman Aitkin
that the Tribunal has jurisdiction to deal with the Builder’s Complaint
having found that adequate
preliminary notice of the dispute was provided to the
matter came on for hearing before the Tribunal on the 1
September 2011. The Tribunal was provided with documentation from
both parties which formed the Tribunal’s book of papers comprising
Tribunal will deal with the issues in accordance with the directions given by
Deputy Chairman Aitkin as set out at pages 270 and
271 of the Tribunal’s
book of papers.
CONTRACTUAL ISSUES
Electrical Provision
provisional sum of $4,000.00 was allowed in the contract in respect of
electrical works. The Tribunal heard from both Owners and
the Builder in
relation to this Complaint item from Owen Lawden who provided a tax invoice from
Accountable Electrics at page 331
of the Tribunal’s papers. The Tribunal
accepts the Builder’s evidence that an electrical lay-out for the
extensions was
faxed by the Builder to Accountable Electrics on the 29
July 2009. See Tribunal’s papers at page 333, 334 and 336. The
Tribunal accepts the Builder’s evidence that at estimate
of costings for
the electrical work was $3,061.30 in accordance with calculations provided by
the Builder at page 336 of the Tribunal
papers. The Tribunal also accepts the
Builder’s evidence that an allowance of $1,000.00 was made for
contingencies to arrive
at the provisional figure of $4,000.00.
Tribunal further accepts the evidence of Owen Lawden that following discussions
between Lawden and the female Owner, significant
additional electrical works
were carried out as is set out at page 339 of the Tribunal papers. The Tribunal
accepts that the invoice
provided by Lawden at Tribunal papers 331 reflected the
costs for the work detailed in that invoice having regard to the
additional electrical works requested by the female Owner.
a consequence of the dispute between the Owners and the Builder the electrician
did not attend to the connection of all three TV
power points and the Telstra
technician engaged by the electrician was told not to attend at the direction of
the Owners. The Tribunal
is of the view that a credit in relation to the
uncompleted works of $150.00 provided in the deduction invoice at page 330 of
Tribunal’s papers is inadequate and in the circumstances the Tribunal
finds that an appropriate deduction in relation to these
items is $300.00. The
adjustment of the tax invoice from Accountable Electrics would accordingly
result in an adjustment to the invoice
to $5,822.00. Adding the Builder’s
margin of 25% to that figure provides a figure of $1,455.50 or a total for the
works of $7.277.50. Deducting the $4,000.00 provisional sum for
electrical works included in the contract gives a balance of $3,277.50
subject to GST of 10% totalling $327.70 providing a total additional payment
required from the Owners of
$3,605.20. The Tribunal is satisfied
that this additional sum is payable by the Owners pursuant to the terms of the
EXTRA BRICKWORK VARIATION
Tribunal heard from both Owners and the Builder in relation to a request by the
Owners for a doorway to be provided as additional
work not provided for in the
contract documentation. There was some dispute between the parties as to
whether any fixed
agreed for the variation however prior to the work involving the variation
being completed the Builder rendered a tax invoice in the
sum of $415.00 in
respect of the additional work. That invoice was paid within 7 days of receipt.
The Tribunal is satisfied that
the additional works were requested by the Owners
and that in paying the invoiced amount the Owners have accepted the additional
costs for these works. The Owners are not entitled to a deduction of that agreed
amount from the contract price. In that respect
the Owners’ claim is
dismissed. The Tribunal does not accept the Owners’ argument that the
Builder’s failure to
strictly comply with the contractual requirements in
relation to a variation are such as to entitle the Owners to the benefit of
works undertaken by the Builder at no cost to the Owners.
SLIDING DOOR
Owners accept that at their request a stacker door into the living room was
changed from a sliding door provided in the contract
documentation. The Owners
accept they agreed to the additional cost and that the appropriate amounts were
charged by the Builder
in his invoice dated 22
June 2009 at page
348 of the Tribunal’s papers. That invoice was paid by the Owners on the
July 2009. In the course of the proceedings the Owners accepted
that invoices had been provided demonstrating the cost of the stacker
the cost of the sliding door credit allowed in the contract. The Tribunal was
satisfied that the extra cost for timber lintels
of $100.00 and the extra cost
for an awning
window in the bathroom for $110.00 was reasonable and accorded with invoices
produced at the hearing. The Tribunal is accordingly
satisfied that the tax
invoice totalling $1,287.00 which was paid on the 1
accurately reflected the Owners indebtedness to the Builder in respect to the
installation of the stacker door and the awning
window in the
provisional sum for water service and drains was allowed
“Drains, water & gas service
Water & gas service
Fit bayonet point & snap vents
Builders margin 25%
$2,500.00 in the contract sum. An invoice rendered by the Builder on the
November 2009 set out the costs as follows
Water service
The Tribunal finds that the additional sum of $33.00 is payable by the Owners
to the Builder under the Contract.
TILING – REMOVAL OF DUPLICATE AMOUNTS
Tribunal heard evidence from the Builder that separate allowances were made in
relation to waterproofing the bathroom. The Tribunal
accepts that there is no
duplication of work in the invoice provided by the Builder at pages 88 and 89 of
the Tribunal’s papers.
The Tribunal finds that the credit of $82.05 in
relation to the provisional sum for tiling of $2,000.00 is
appropriate.
Owners have requested removal of the claimed items of $50.00 each for delivery
and fitting of the vanity cabinet in accordance
with the tax invoice from the
Builder at page 164 of the Tribunal’s papers. The Owners have accepted
that the Builder is entitled
to the delivery and fitting costs and that the
credit of $287.38 allowed in the invoice is appropriate.
PLUMBING FITTINGS
Owners are claiming that insufficient credit has been provided in relation to
the supply by the Owners of a toilet roll holder
and towel rail which was
included in project specification items at Tribunal papers 107. The Tribunal
accepts that the Owners provided
the claimed items and will allow a credit of
$20.00 in relation to those
items. The Tribunal will accordingly increase the credit due to the Owners
from $396.00 to $416.00.
The Owners are seeking a credit in relation to the exhaust fan which was
included in the quote from Accountable Electrics claiming
the sum of $130.00 in
respect of the supply, installation and wiring of an exhaust fan in the
bathroom. The Builder has given a credit
of $65.00 in relation to the exhaust
fan (See Invoice at P79 of the Tribunal’s papers). The Tribunal considers
that to be a
fair allowance, the balance of the $65.00 being attributable to the
installation and wiring of the fan by the electrician. The Owners’
for an additional credit is accordingly dismissed.
FAULTY WORKMANSHIP
Complaint Item 1 – Insulation
Builder provided anticon insulation underneath the roof sheeting instead of
providing R3 ceiling bats in accordance with the requirements
of the building
license issued for the renovation. The Builder conceded that he has not complied
with the code requirements in relation
to insulation confirmed by the report of
Inspector De Vos at page 198 of the Tribunal’s papers.
Builder indicated to the Tribunal that he could obtain insulation at a rate of
$2.51 per square metre and that he considered 2
hours labour would be sufficient
to install the bats. The Tribunal considers the Builder’s assessment to
underestimate the
time required for the installation and the costs of supply and
delivery of the insulation. The
Tribunal has been provided with a quote at page 35 of the Tribunal’s
papers for $1,119.28 based on 82 sq metres for 3.5 R bats
with the insulation
cost per square metre at $9.20 and an installation cost per square metre of
$4.45. The Tribunal considers that
those rates are acceptable and reflect
general trade rates. The Tribunal will accordingly allow the sum of $1,119.28.
That amount
will be deducted from the amount owing by the Owners to the
COMPLAINT ITEM 2
Living Room Wall Out of Alignment by
Tribunal heard evidence that a decision was made on site for the construction of
a nib at the join of the original wall and the
new wall of the renovation. The
Owners allege that a variation to the contractual documents was made as a result
of discussions on
site to the effect that there would be a straight wall with a
flush joint between the existing wall and the new wall.
Builder gave evidence that there was a meeting on site with the Owners following
demolition when it was found the existing wall
in the sleep-out had white ant
damage and did not line up with the existing wall in the lounge. The Builder
gave evidence that it
was necessary to re-align the wall as the existing wall
was not capable of supporting the new roof structure.
is a dispute as to whether that was agreed to by the Owners however the
renovation was constructed by forming a nib wall at
the junction of the old and
new. The effect of the construction of the nib
wall was to reduce the area available to the Owners in the study by
approximately 160mm. By way of compensation the living room internal
increased by 160mm to 6,800mm. The effect of the change was to increase the
overall area of the dwelling by approximately
0.6 of a square metre. Inspector
De Vos commented that “While it is desirable for no variations to be made
during construction,
an existing house that has been subject to alterations and
additions over its life may be difficult to accurately measure and provide
precise architectural drawings.” It is the Inspector’s opinion that
small variations to building additions to accommodate
oversights incorrect
measurements or locations on the drawings are a routine occurrence. The
Inspector noted that the additional
floor space provided to the new living area
is not considered detrimental to the value of the building.
Tribunal attended the premises to inspect the renovation and formed the view
that from an aesthetic view point the absence of
a straight wall was not
detrimental. In addition the Tribunal was of the view that the difficulty with
the potential for cracking
with a straight wall was avoided by the manner of
construction utilised by the Builder. The Tribunal agreed with the
Inspector’s
assessment that no action was recommended in relation to the
changes. The Tribunal does not consider that the failure to strictly
comply with
the plans warrants the workmanship faulty or unsatisfactory and is also of the
view that the value of the Owners’
residence has potentially been enhanced
by the change.
COMPLAINT ITEM 3
Chimney Below Roofline Reinstated – Never
Approved to Demolish
page 199 of the Tribunal papers Inspector De Vos expressed the view that
“It is the Inspector’s opinion that it was
clearly shown on the Council approved and signed drawings that the chimney
was to terminate below the roof line; and consequently the demolition of the
chimney stack is deemed to have been in the scope
of the Builder’s
Builder confirmed that it was necessary to demolish the chimney to allow roof
framing to proceed. The Tribunal accepts the Inspector’s
view that this
matter is not the result of faulty workmanship. The claim is accordingly
COMPLAINT ITEM 4
Bathroom Vessel Cemented/Installed
Square/Grouted
Tribunal accepts Inspector De Vos’ recommendation that the Builder should
be required to seal the gap between the bottom
edge of the vanity basin and the
vanity bench top to comply with Australian standards. The Builder has agreed to
undertake this work
and there will be an Order to remedy in the above terms
within 28 days.
COMPLAINT ITEM 5 & COMPLAINT ITEM (A)
complaints relate to alleged plastering deficiencies. The Tribunal inspected the
renovations and formed the view that the plastering
was of an acceptable
standard and that any minor defects would be the subject of maintenance items.
These complaints are accordingly
COMPLAINT ITEM 6
Builder has agreed to an Order to remedy to be complied with within 28 days in
relation to this complaint item.
COMPLAINT ITEM 7
Sliding Door in Living Area
Parallel/Straighten
De Vos expressed the view that the Builder had constructed the new work square
and had merged and adjusted the external
wall into the existing wall. In
recommending that no action be taken in relation to this complaint item the
Inspector was of the
view that there was no evidence of faulty or unsatisfactory
workmanship. The Tribunal attended the site and noted that the door frame
plumb, that there was no wind in the frame and that the door operated without
any difficulty. The Tribunal accordingly dismisses
this complaint
COMPLAINT ITEM 8
New Slab Joint to Existing Not Straight, Needs
Repairing to Allow for Tiling
Owners conceded that there was no evidence to justify a finding in relation to
this complaint item with the Owners having reduced
the finished floor level to
accommodate tiling undertaken by the Owners. The Owners consented to a dismissal
of this claim item.
COMPLAINT ITEM 11
Custom Wood Moulding in the Addition
Builder conceded that mouldings were not provided in the new addition and that
it was inappropriate for an Order to pay to be
made in lieu of an Order to
Owners provided a quote for $658.00. The quote was not itemised in terms of
labour and material components. The quote is at page
275 of the Tribunal’s
Tribunal has calculated that the quantity of skirtings involved in the
renovation is 9 x 5.4n length which equals 48.6 lineal
metres. The Builder has
allowed a credit of $275.00 at page 344 of the Tribunal’s papers. The
Tribunal’s view is that
it agrees with the cost of the supply of the
skirting at $80.00 with an additional $30.00 for quarter round. Allowing $12.00
lineal metre for the installation of the skirting and quad a labour
component including sundries of $570.00 provides an overall cost
of $680.00.
Allowing a 25% Builder’s margin of $170.00 provides an overall figure of
$850.00. Allowing 10% GST of $85.00 produces
a total credit of
COMPLAINT ITEM 12
Dividing Fence Between the Properties
Tribunal was unable to make any finding in relation to this complaint item due
to insufficient evidence to establish the manner
in which the asbestos sheeting
was damaged. This complaint item is accordingly dismissed.
COMPLAINT ITEM B
Plaster to Junction of New Wall to Existing Wall
is Unsatisfactory
Builder acknowledged that further remedial work was required in relation to this
complaint item and agreed to an Order to remedy
BUILDER’S CLAIM FOR INTEREST
Builder has claimed interest on unpaid amounts pursuant to clause 7(e)(i) of the
contract in relation to the alleged late payment
of the sum of $7,500.00 due
under the contract and in relation to the balance of outstanding monies due to
the Builder under the
relation to the first claim the Owners drew a cheque payable to Craig Bailey,
Luton Holdings Pty Ltd for $7,500.00 on the 12
November 2009. The
Builder’s offices were closed for Christmas holidays when the cheque would
have been received in the ordinary
course of mail. The cheque was presented
after legal advice had been provided to the Builder in January 2010. The
Tribunal rejects
the Builder’s claim for interest from the date the cheque
was drawn until the date it was presented.
Tribunal is prepared to allow the Builder’s claim for interest on the
balance of monies owing by the Owners from the 26
November 2009
until the 7
October 2011 in accordance with
Section 7(e)(i)
of the contract. The Schedule provides for interest at 14%. It is appropriate
that the Builder be paid interest in accordance with
SUMMARY OF CLAIMS
Price $121,770.00
Extras for additional work, pc and ps items
Brickwork and plaster
Sliding door
Total Due Under Contract $127,110.45 Payments received under
Contract $122,117.25
Plumbing fittings
Total of Payments & Credits
$124,956.96
Balance due by Owners to Builder
Interest from 26/11/09 to 7/10/11 681 days @ 14%
Total due inclusive of interest
Builder has agreed that a declaration be made for the 4 month defect liability
period in accordance with Clause 14 of the Contract
shall commence on the
October 2011.
will accordingly be Orders that :-
(i) The Owners pay to the Builder the sum of $2,715.99 within 14 days of the
date of this Order.
(ii) In relation to Complaint Item 4, by consent, the Builder is required to
seal the gap between the bottom edge of the vanity basin
and the vanity bench
top to comply with Australian standards within 28 days.
(iii) In relation to Complaint Item 6, by consent, the Builder is to remedy the
out of plumb light switch within 28 days.
(iv) In relation to Complaint Item B, by consent, the Builder is to remedy the
plaster work to the junction of the new wall to the
existing wall within 28
(v) By consent a declaration that the 4 months defect liability period in
accordance with Clause 14 of the Contract commence on the
(vi) All other complaint items are
J R CRIDDLE
DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (825 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
PDF format (92 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter