URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WASCA/2025/151.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:08:13
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
DA SILVA -v- THE STATE OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA [2025] WASCA 151 (21 October 2025)
COURT OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
THE COURT OF APPEAL
SILVA -v- THE STATE OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
[2025] WASCA 151
SEPTEMBER 2025
DELIVERED :
OCTOBER 2025
CACR 111 of 2024
FORTUNATO MADEIRA DA SILVA
STATE OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
COURT OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
IND 346 of 2022
law - Appeal against sentence - Appellant convicted on his pleas of guilty of
one count of money laundering contrary to s
(WA) and one count of
possessing cash reasonably suspected of having been unlawfully obtained contrary
to s 417 of
- Where appellant packaged and
delivered $1.3 million in cash intended as payment for 15 kg of
methylamphetamine - Where appellant
was paid $5,100 in cash for his role in
criminal enterprise - Whether sentence manifestly excessive
Legislation:
(WA), s 417(1),
s 563A(1)(b)
to appeal refused
Representation:
Solicitors:
Amidzic Legal
Director of Public
Prosecutions (WA)
referred to in decision(s):
OF THE COURT
is an offender appeal against sentence. The appeal was filed one day out of
time. We would grant the necessary extension of
24 September 2024, on the first scheduled day of the appellant's trial, he
was convicted on his pleas of guilty of two offences,
both of which were
committed on 10 April 2021. Those offences were one count of possession of
$5,100 in cash reasonably suspected
to have been unlawfully obtained, contrary
to s 417(1) of the
Criminal Code
) (count 2); and one
count of possessing or dealing with $1.3 million in cash that was the
proceeds of an offence, contrary to s 563A(1)(b)
of the Code
(count 3). The maximum penalties for those offences are 7 years'
imprisonment and 20 years' imprisonment, respectively.
26 September 2024, Zempilas DCJ sentenced the appellant to
12 months' imprisonment on count 2 and 5 years 6 months'
imprisonment
on count 3. Her Honour ordered that the sentences be
served concurrently. Thus, the total effective sentence was 5 years
imprisonment. The appellant was made eligible for parole, and
the sentences were backdated to commence on 15 June 2024.
brief terms, the appellant had been paid $5,100 in cash to package, and then
deliver, $1.3 million dollars in cash as payment
for 15 kg of
methylamphetamine, which had been couriered from Melbourne to Perth on
10 April 2021. The appellant knew, or at least
suspected, that the
$1.3 million in cash was the proceeds of a serious offence and was to be
used in the commission of a serious
criminal enterprise.
appellant relies on a single ground of appeal which alleges, in effect, that the
sentence of 5 years 6 months' imprisonment imposed
on count 3 was
For the reasons that follow, the ground has not been made out and the appeal
must be dismissed.
facts of the offending, as found by the learned sentencing judge, are as
the morning of 10 April 2021, investigators from the Drug and Firearms
Squad intercepted a shipment of 15 kg of methylamphetamine
from a courier
who had recently flown into Perth from Melbourne. The courier was arrested
inside a room of a hotel located at 417
Hay Street, Perth. Investigators
located the methylamphetamine packaged inside a suitcase in the hotel room.
investigators substituted an inert substance for the methylamphetamine and
repacked the suitcase. They also added a tracking
the hotel at 417 Hay Street, Perth, and collected the suitcase.
to an apartment in Rivervale where he met another man, Samuel Hughes.
There, the two men removed the substituted methylamphetamine
from the suitcase
and repackaged the substance into clip‑seal bags.
2.41 pm, the appellant, using the codename 'Romeo', was added to a Ciphr
group chat. At 2.44 pm, he received a message in that
group chat from
another of the participants, with the codename 'Victor'. Victor told the
Romeo, bro, I need to have 1.3 into two bags, cryovac'd, placed and passed to
where the bro needs it.
At 2.46 pm, the appellant replied:
followed the location of the tracking device planted
in the suitcase.
5.31 pm, a message was sent in the Ciphr group chat,
Are we good for 6 pm, boys?
To which the appellant replied, at 5.41 pm:
A bit after, just putting funds away.
Accompanying this message was a photograph showing bundles
6.37 pm, the appellant sent a message saying:
Doing the last couple of bags and heading straight to you.
short time after sending this message, the appellant requested, and was provided
with, the details of where 'the funds' were to
be delivered.
417 Hay Street, Perth. He was then told to park his vehicle
in a car park
near the hotel.
8.07 pm, the appellant sent another
Walk across the road to the Wilson outdoor car park. The bags [of cash] are in
the boot. I'll have the car running. White Subaru
8.08 pm, the appellant sent a photograph of the registration plate of the
Subaru Forester. At 8.09 pm, he sent a photograph of
two bags of cash. He
then drove the Subaru Forester to the hotel car park. At 8.14 pm, the
appellant sent a message, accompanied
by a photograph of a person walking
through the car park. He asked:
Did you just walk through a car park?
8.16 pm, the appellant sent a further message,
had occurred in the hotel car park was that an undercover police officer, on
foot, had collected the $1.3 million in cash from
the boot of the Subaru
Forester. This money was then seized by police.
Investigators
then attempted to arrest the appellant, who ran away. He was arrested a short
time later near Royal Perth Hospital.
When police searched him, they found
$5,100 in cash (the subject of count 2) in his wallet. This cash was
alleged to be the appellant's
payment for delivering the $1.3 million in
cash at the car park. The $1.3 million in cash (the subject of
count 3) was alleged to
be payment for the 15 kg of methylamphetamine
that was to be retrieved and repackaged by Horton and Hughes.
The appellant's personal circumstances
appellant was 32 years old at the time of the offending and 35 years
old when he was sentenced. He is the sixth of eight children
born to an East
Timorese mother and a Portuguese father. His father passed away when he was
only 4 years old, after which the appellant's
mother emigrated to Australia
with him and his siblings.
appellant maintains close relationships with his siblings, their partners and
his many extended family members.
appellant is married. He and his wife have two young daughters. The
appellant's wife remains very supportive of him. She has
a heart condition for
which she is receiving ongoing treatment and monitoring.
appellant left school part of the way through year 12 in order to support
his mother and siblings, following the death of his
older brother. He later
resumed his formal education and obtained a bachelor's degree in finance and
economics from Murdoch University
in about 2020.
leaving school, the appellant has been in regular employment. His main
interests are in boxing and fitness. The appellant
has fought as a professional
boxer and has worked as a boxing or fitness instructor at various gyms.
logistics company. In early 2023, the appellant and
his wife opened their
own commercial boxing gym in the Medina area. Since May 2023, the
appellant has also taken on the role of
head coach at the gym, and now teaches
classes there in the evenings after working at the logistics company during the
appellant has no issues with alcohol or illicit drugs. In 2021, an MRI
scan revealed that he had suffered prior traumatic brain
injury as well as
bilateral cerebellar infarcts. No medical evidence was put before the learned
sentencing judge as to the cause
or causes of this condition, nor was any
evidence presented which suggested that the appellant suffers any ongoing
symptoms. The
condition did not stop the appellant from resuming competitive
boxing in September 2024.
appellant has also been diagnosed with high blood pressure, which is likely
attributable to a hole in his heart. On 31 July
2024, the appellant
underwent a procedure to close this defect. Again, there was no evidence before
the sentencing judge to suggest
that this condition was ongoing. None of the
conditions referred to are unable to be treated in custody nor would they cause
appellant to suffer any particular hardship during his incarceration.
was some evidence put before the learned sentencing judge which showed that,
since being released on bail in late 2021, the
appellant has been diagnosed
with symptoms consistent with a major depressive disorder and
post‑traumatic stress disorder,
for which he has been medicated.
appellant has a minor criminal history. In 2008, he was convicted of
disorderly conduct. In 2010, he was charged with, and
later convicted of,
another count of disorderly conduct, as well as one count of assault occasioning
bodily harm. The appellant
received fines for each of these offences.
was provided with a considerable number of character references from both family
and friends, who speak highly of the
appellant's personal qualities and his
dedication to his work and his family. They regard the offending as out of
The sentencing remarks
her sentencing remarks, her Honour accurately described the facts of the
offending and the appellant's personal circumstances.
described the appellant as playing 'an active and significant role' in the
having regard to:
(1) the appellant's interactions with persons who were or whom he believed were
other members of the criminal enterprise, using encrypted
software and
codenames, which included him sending photographs of the bundles of cash and the
registration plate of his vehicle,
so that it could be located by others;
(2) the appellant alone was in charge of packaging and transporting the
$1.3 million in cash;
(3) the appellant was entrusted by more senior members within the criminal
enterprise to take possession of the cash; and
(4) the appellant's role in packaging and delivering the cash was intended to be
the crucial final step in the criminal enterprise,
being the payment of
$1.3 million for the 15 kg of
methylamphetamine.
learned sentencing judge identified two aggravating factors. First, the large
amount of money the subject of count 3; and, secondly,
the fact that the
appellant committed the offence for 'financial gain and
also identified two main mitigating factors, being the pleas of guilty and the
fact that the offending was out of character
to the pleas of guilty, the learned sentencing judge observed that they were
entered late. She gave a discount of 5% for the
pleas of guilty under
Sentencing Act 1995
found that the appellant had expressed no remorse for his offending.
Her Honour said that there was no mitigation for
the appellant's physical
and mental health conditions. She considered whether there was some mitigation
as a result of the hardship
that the appellant's incarceration would have upon
his family, but concluded that the level of hardship in the appellant's case was
not exceptional and did not warrant significant mitigation. Her Honour
also considered whether parity considerations arose, having
regard to the
sentences that were imposed on Horton and Hughes for their respective roles in
the criminal enterprise. Her Honour
concluded that parity was not a
relevant consideration in the appellant's
sentencing.
learned sentencing judge mentioned the general sentencing principles applicable
to the type of offences committed by the appellant.
She correctly observed that
particular weight is generally given to specific and general deterrence;
recognising that money, or
property, laundering is vital to the functioning of
organised crime syndicates, and that money laundering is an important cog in
wheel of organised
to the appellant's knowledge of how the $1.3 million in cash was to be
used, her Honour
The money the subject of this offence - that is, in count 3 - was for the
purpose of the sale and distribution of methylamphetamine.
While you may not have known precisely what offence these proceeds derived from,
you knew or suspected - you certainly had reasonable
grounds to believe - the
money was the proceeds of a serious offence. There are a limited number of
offences that such a quantity
of money could have derived from, and all of them
are serious.
Similarly, while you [may] not have known precisely [where] these proceeds were
destined for, there are a limited number of such
enterprises - in particular,
where the sum of money involved is $1.3 million in cash, and where the
arrangements for its packaging,
transportation, and delivery were made through
encrypted communication using codenames, and where the packaging and collection
done in the way that it was.
It is difficult to accept that, at the very least, your suspicions that this
cash was destined for a serious criminal enterprise
would not have been
heightened. However, in all the circumstances, even if you did not ask or turn
your mind to it, wilful ignorance
does not reduce your criminal responsibility
to any degree.
learned sentencing judge found that the role played by the appellant was
limited; but it was also a distinct role, which was
integral to the criminal
enterprise. Her Honour reiterated that the offence had been committed for
It was not merely a 'momentary or fleeting' lapse of judgement; rather, it was a
serious and significant
imposing the individual sentences, her Honour considered the application of
the totality principle. Having decided that a
sentence of 5 years
6 months' imprisonment was a proper reflection of the appellant's overall
offending, she ordered that the sentences
be served concurrently.
learned sentencing judge noted that, as the total effective sentence was more
than 5 years' imprisonment, a suspended imprisonment
order could not be
Applicable legal principles
allegation made by the appellant that the sentence on count 3 was
manifestly excessive is an allegation of implied error, to
well‑established principles in
House v The
apply. The orthodox approach to the question of whether a sentence is
manifestly excessive is to view the offence in light of the
maximum sentence
prescribed by law for the offence, the standards of sentencing customarily
imposed with respect to offences of that
kind, the place that the criminal
conduct occupies on the scale of seriousness for crimes of that type, and the
offender's personal
circumstances.
manner in which this court identifies the standards of sentencing customarily
imposed in respect of an offence was recently described
Hodges v The State of
We adopt, without repeating, the relevant position of the revisions in that case
Tan v The State of Western
the court identified a number of principles applicable to offences contrary to
s 563A of the Code, as follows:
[T]he following principles, emerging from the cases dealing with offences
against the Commonwealth legislation, also apply to offences
against s 563A
of the Code:
(1) The most important consideration is what the offender did, as there may be
little evidence before the court as to the organisation
behind the offence, or
the source of the funds or their ultimate intended use.
(2) The number of transactions carried out and the period over which the
transaction(s) occurred are significant, in that they may
indicate the extent of
the offender's criminality, whereas a single transaction may reflect an isolated
(3) Also relevant is the degree of authority reposed in the offender, the role
of the offender in the particular money laundering
arrangement, and the amount
of money involved in the offending.
(4) Money laundering is 'vital to the functioning of organised criminal
syndicates' and the money launderer is an 'important cog
in the wheel of
organised crime'. Thus, money laundering is an offence in respect of which
general deterrence is given significant
The last of these principles warrants some elaboration. The laundering of the
proceeds of criminal activity is the lifeblood of
organised crime. To state the
obvious, the ultimate object of much of the criminal activity in which such
organisations engage is
to obtain money in a form in which it can be used
without alerting the law enforcement authorities. The laundering of the
of criminal activity is often the essential final step in achieving
that object. This underscores the importance of general deterrence
sentencing for offences of this kind. (footnotes omitted)
The parties' submissions
was submitted on behalf of the appellant that, having regard to the appellant's
objective criminality and the outcomes in cases
said to be comparable, the
sentence of 5 years 6 months' imprisonment on count 3 was
unreasonable or plainly unjust.
for the appellant emphasised that the appellant was only involved in the
commission of the offence for a period of approximately
six hours on
10 April 2021, and that his role was limited to packaging the cash, knowing
that it was to be delivered to the hotel,
and then transporting the cash to the
nominated location where the delivery took place.
was argued that, unlike other cases which involved multiple money laundering
'transactions', the present case involved only one
isolated transaction.
for the appellant emphasised that the offending was out of character for the
appellant and that his personal circumstances
were favourable. In essence, it
was suggested that these personal considerations were significantly mitigating
and justified the
imposition of a substantially lesser sentence.
to the comparable cases, the appellant's broad submission to this court was that
the individual sentence imposed upon him on count
3 was greater than
sentences imposed in a number of cases in which the offending was objectively
more serious. Thus, it was said
that the sentence imposed on the appellant in
this case was inconsistent with the standards of sentences customarily imposed
offences contrary to s 563A of the Code.
behalf of the respondent, it was submitted, in effect, that the appellant was
aware, having regard to all of the surrounding circumstances
of the offence,
that he was playing an important role in using money, which had been derived
from criminal activity, to fund further
criminal activity. It was further
submitted the appellant was aware that the offending involved objectively
significant criminality,
even if he did not know precisely how the cash had been
sourced, nor the exact nature of the offence for which it was to be used.
to the comparable cases, counsel for the respondent submitted that the cases
decided by this court are distinguishable on their
facts and/or having regard to
the personal circumstances of the offenders, and that there was nothing to
suggest or demonstrate that
the sentence imposed upon the appellant was
inconsistent with the outcomes of the quite small number of comparable cases
by this court in respect of offences contrary to s 563A of the
Disposition
mentioned, the maximum penalty for an offence contrary to s 563A of the
Code is 20 years' imprisonment.
Section 563A(1)
of the Code states:
(1) A person who -
(a) in Western Australia engages, directly or indirectly, in a transaction that
involves; or
(b) brings into Western Australia, or in Western Australia receives, possesses,
conceals, disposes of or deals with,
money or other property that is the proceeds of an offence is guilty of a crime
and is liable to imprisonment for 20 years.
appellant was convicted of an offence under s 563A(1)(b). The indictment
alleged that the appellant possessed or dealt with
money that was the proceeds
of an offence.
'proceeds of an offence' relevantly means, having regard to the definition in
s 563A(3) of the Code, money that is derived directly
or indirectly by any
person from the commission of an offence, whether that be an offence against a
law of Western Australia, the
Commonwealth or another State or a Territory.
conduct sought to be criminalised in s 563A of the Code is broad in its
scope. It is not restricted to those cases where the
proceeds of crime are
laundered or 'cleansed' into a form which can then be used without alerting law
enforcement authorities. As
this case shows, the offence also criminalises
dealings in property, including cash obtained by criminal activity, which is
in the commission of other criminal activity. The fact that the present
offence concerns this latter kind of conduct does not mean
that it is a less
serious kind of offence contrary to s 563A of the Code.
submissions made on behalf of the appellant downplay the seriousness of the
offence he committed. By his plea of guilty, the
appellant admitted that he
possessed or dealt with $1.3 million in cash, which was the proceeds of an
offence. Although the appellant
did not know the precise nature of the offence
from which the cash was derived or realised, he must have known or, at the very
believed or suspected, having regard to the sum of cash involved and the
limited types of offences which produce sums of this order,
that it was the
proceeds of serious offending. Further, having regard to circumstances such as
the amount of cash; the need to count,
pack and transport the cash; and the
activities that were coordinated with others via encrypted communications, it
would have been
obvious to the appellant that he was involved in an organised
criminal enterprise.
it is true that there was no evidence that the appellant had any ongoing role in
the criminal enterprise, the role he played
was vital to its successful
conclusion. Although it could be said that the appellant's involvement was not
over a lengthy period
of time, it involved considerable organisation
nonetheless. The cash had to be delivered to, or obtained, by the appellant.
is clear from the encrypted messages that it took some time for the appellant
to count and package the cash. He then went about
the business of transporting
it, and making it available to be picked up. The fact that he was entrusted
with such a large quantity
of cash speaks volumes about the high level of trust
that was invested in him.
was nothing naive or unwilling about the appellant's criminal conduct. There is
also nothing to indicate that the appellant's
ability to appreciate the
wrongfulness of his actions was in any way impaired. It appears that the
appellant involved himself in
the criminal enterprise in the hope of making a
swift and substantial financial return. Having regard to all of these
circumstances
and those referred to at [59], we regard the offence as involving
a high degree of objective criminality.
have had regard to all of the cases that were cited by the parties, being
Phan v The State of Western
H v The State of Western
The State of Western
Australia v
Watson v The State of
Diamantopoulos v The
State of Western
the outset, it must be observed that the number of cases said to be comparable
is small. Such a small number does not suffice
to reveal customary standards of
sentencing, or an appropriate sentencing
It follows from this that there is no established tariff for offences under
s 563A of the Code.
outcomes in
where leave to appeal against sentence was refused, have very little utility as
comparable cases and can be put
other cases do not assist the appellant either.
Diamantopoulos
there was no challenge to the individual sentence of 8 years' imprisonment
imposed for an offence of money laundering contrary to
s 563A(1)(b) of the
Code, involving approximately $4.5 million in cash. That sentence was
imposed in circumstances where the offender
pleaded guilty at an early stage in
the proceedings and therefore received a
discount of 20%; was found
to be genuinely remorseful; and had good prospects of rehabilitation.
H v The State of Western
, the offender was convicted of one count of money laundering
involving over $2 million in cash. At first instance, the offender
sentenced to 4 years 2 months' imprisonment. On appeal, this court
resentenced the offender to 3 years 6 months' imprisonment.
the appeal was allowed on the basis that the sentencing judge had made an
express error regarding the offender's criminal
culpability. The court refused
leave to appeal in respect of the ground which alleged the sentence of
4 years 2 months' imprisonment
was manifestly excessive. This means
that, like the sentences the subject of appeal in
sentence of 4 years 2 months imposed on the offender at first instance
cannot be taken to provide a marker as to the upper limits
of the proper
exercise of the sentencing discretion.
the appellant in the present case, the offender in
pleaded guilty at
an early stage of the proceedings and received a
discount of 20%;
demonstrated genuine remorse; and, as a 21‑year‑old at the time of
the offending, had the mitigation
of youth. The offender in
was found, by
reason of his age and situation, to be vulnerable to exploitation by those above
him in the criminal enterprise. The
criminality of the offender in
was also less
than that of the appellant in the present case. Also unlike the appellant, he
was not entrusted with packaging or
transporting the cash alone. Rather, he
followed the directions given by his co‑offenders to perform menial tasks
procuring the mobile telephones to be used by his co‑offenders;
providing his details for the accommodation, which was booked
in his name; and
the offender and his co‑offenders.
Having regard to these factors,
is an unhelpful
comparator from the point of view of the appellant.
offenders were convicted of one count of money laundering in respect of
approximately $1.5 million in cash. Both pleaded
guilty at the first
reasonable opportunity and received a discount of 25% pursuant to
Sentencing Act
. Both were
relatively youthful, and were remorseful. Neither offender had any prior
convictions. The sentences imposed upon the
offenders in
instance (5 years 9 months' imprisonment and 4 years
6 months' imprisonment) were not interfered with by this court on appeal.
Given the mitigation that was available to the offenders in
, which was not
available to the appellant, and the sentences imposed upon them, the sentence
imposed on the appellant does not appear
to be manifestly excessive.
is unnecessary to describe at length the facts and circumstances of
, other than
to mention that the two offenders - who were convicted after trial of offences
contrary to both s 417 and s 563A of the
Code, involving a total
amount of $4,494,820 in cash - were resentenced by this court to total effective
sentences of 9 years' imprisonment
and 7 years' imprisonment,
respectively. This outcome does not suggest that the sentence imposed upon the
appellant was manifestly
appellant's personal circumstances are largely favourable to him. He has good
support in the community and his prospects of
rehabilitation appear favourable.
However, given the need for general deterrence and the objective level of
seriousness of the offence,
these matters do not provide much mitigation. Nor
do the appellant's physical and mental health issues, or the impact that the
appellant's
incarceration will have on his family. As we have already
mentioned, the appellant does not have in his favour an early plea of
genuine remorse or youth.
all of the relevant circumstances are taken into account, it cannot be said that
a sentence of 5 years 6 months' imprisonment
was unreasonable or
plainly unjust. We would not imply or infer error from the sentencing outcome.
The ground of appeal does not
have a reasonable prospect of success. Leave to
appeal must be refused and the appeal must be taken to be
orders that we would make are as
extension of time is granted.
to appeal is refused.
appeal is dismissed.
certify that the preceding paragraph(s) comprise the reasons for decision of the
Supreme Court of Western Australia.
Associate to the Honourable
Justice Mazza
21 OCTOBER 2025
Appeal ts 2.
Sentencing Act
House v The King
[1936] HCA 40
(1936) 55 CLR 499
Kabambi v The State of
Western Australia
[2019] WASCA 44
Hodges v The State of
Western Australia
[2025] WASCA 136
Tan v The State of Western
[2019] WASCA 112
[49] ‑ [50].
Phan v The State of
Western Australia
H v The State of Western
The State of Western
Australia v Zhuang
Watson v The State of
Western Australia
Diamantopoulos v The State
of Western Australia
GUE v The State of
Western Australia
[2022] WASCA 121
Criminal Appeals Act 2004
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (267 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter