URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WAIRC/2025/172.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:04:18
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
My Foodie Box Limited -v- Alain Trabelsi [2025] WAIRC 172; (18 March 2025)
AGAINST A DECISION OF THE COMMISSION IN MATTER NUMBER B 32/2023 GIVEN ON 11
WESTERN AUSTRALIAN INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COMMISSION
CHIEF COMMISSIONER S J KENNER
COMMISSIONER T EMMANUEL
COMMISSIONER C TSANG
WEDNESDAY, 2 OCTOBER 2024
DELIVERED :
TUESDAY, 18 MARCH 2025
MY FOODIE BOX LIMITED
ALAIN TRABELSI
ON APPEAL FROM:
Coram : COMMISSIONER T KUCERA
[2024] WAIRC 00153
File No : B 32 OF 2023
Law (WA) – Claim for denied contractual benefits – Procedural
fairness and bias – Assistance to unrepresented
parties – Relevant
principles – Absence of evidence before the Commission to establish
contractual payments conditional
on achievement of performance measures –
Appeal dismissed
Legislation
Industrial Relations Act 1979
Appearances:
Mr B Hughes
Case(s) referred to in reasons:
Director-General Department of Justice v The Civil Service Association of WA
[2025] WAIRC 00146
Jones v Dunkel
[1959] HCA 8
Kiosses v Presidian Management Services Pty Ltd
[2018] WAIRC 00330
Mak Industrial Water Solutions Pty Ltd v Doherty (No2)
[2023] WASC 279
Palermo v Rosenthal
[2011] WAIRC 00069
(2011) 91 WAIG 129
Reasons for Decision
THE FULL BENCH:
Brief background
respondent was initially employed as the Advertising Manager for the appellant,
commencing employment in August 2019. The appellant
operated an online
meal supply business which business was conducted on a subscription service
basis. The respondent is a French
national, and was employed under a Temporary
Skill Shortage 482 Visa. At the time of his initial employment, the respondent
employed on a base salary of $70,000 per annum exclusive of superannuation.
In April 2021 the respondent’s salary increased
from $70,000 to $100,000
per annum exclusive of superannuation. Later, in October 2021, the respondent
obtained a promotion to a
new position of Director of Business Development.
a result, the respondent maintained that there was an agreement for his salary
to increase to $140,000 per annum, exclusive of
superannuation. The respondent
maintained that at the time however, an agreement was reached between himself
and the Chief Executive
Officer of the appellant, Mrs Hughes, that the
additional remuneration would be payable in increments of $10,000 every three
The respondent maintained that these additional amounts were not linked
to performance based KPI targets or other incentives to
be achieved.
May 2022, the first quarterly payment of $10,000 for the March 2022 quarter
was paid by the appellant to the respondent. This
was reflected in a letter
from Mrs Hughes to the respondent dated 31 May 2022
(exhibit A1). It was common ground that the letter
mistakenly referred to
the respondent’s former position of Advertising Manager and not his new
position of Director of Business
Development. The letter relevantly provided as
Dear Alain,
Congradulations (sic) on completing 3 months of the Advertising Manager
While the role remains probationary you are entitled to a payment equivalent
of AUD $10,000 every three months served as discussed
with Mai & Bryan
Please accept this letter as formal notice the payment for the period 1st Jan
2022 to 31st March 2022 will be paid into your nominated
account on the
31st May 2022.
2022, the respondent obtained permanent residency in Australia. He then went on
a period of annual leave. On his return
from annual leave in September
2022, he was informed by Mrs Hughes that there had been a change to his
duties with a number of them,
including his managerial duties, being transferred
to another employee. The respondent maintained that there was no explanation
provided to him for this change.
In November
2022, the respondent tendered his resignation by the giving of eight
weeks’ notice. The respondent ceased employment
with the appellant on
30 December 2022.
Claim at first instance
respondent commenced a claim for denied contractual benefits alleging that the
appellant had failed to pay him his quarterly payments
of $10,000 for the second
quarter of 2022 and had failed to pay him a pro rata amount for the third
quarter of 2022. The respondent’s
total claim was in the sum of
$17,692.30.
appellant’s response to the respondent’s claim was to the effect
that whilst not denying there had been an agreement
to remunerate the respondent
by way of additional payments of $10,000 per quarter, those payments were made
conditional upon the
respondent achieving performance benchmarks by way of
measurable KPIs, which he failed to do. The appellant maintained therefore,
that it had not denied the respondent any entitlements under his contract of
employment.
Decision of the Commission
Commission heard and determined the matter and declared that the respondent had
been denied a benefit under his contract of employment
in the amount of $10,000
for the April to June quarter 2022. The Commission was not satisfied that the
respondent had established
a pro rata entitlement for the July to September
quarter 2022 and that claim was dismissed. In doing so, the learned Commissioner
found and concluded as follows:
(a) In terms of relevant principles
of law, the determination of rights and liabilities under a contract are to be
considered objectively
having regard to what a reasonable person in the position
of the parties would have intended to apply. The text, context and purpose
contract are to be considered, in determining the parties’ common
intentions. Relevant principles set out in
Mak Industrial Water Solutions
Pty Ltd v Doherty [No2]
[2023] WASC 279
per Quinlan CJ were
stated and relied upon;
(b) That except in the case of a variation, the conduct of the parties to a
contract after it is formed cannot be taken into account
to ascertain the
meaning of the terms of the contract;
(c) As to the evidence of both the respondent and Mrs Hughes, the only
witnesses called to give evidence in the matter, a preference
was given to each
of them as to certain matters arising on the proceedings, and that the overall
truth of the witnesses as to the
matters in question ‘fell somewhere in
the middle’ (reasons at [106]). The failure by the appellant to call
to corroborate aspects of Mrs Hughes’ evidence led to
Jones v Dunkel
[1959] HCA 8
, inference;
(d) The respondent’s initial contract as Advertising Manager did not
contain any express term for performance based on KPIs;
(e) That in August 2021, a second written contract of employment was
entered into between the parties. This was prepared to assist
the respondent
with his visa application. This second contract incorporated an increase in the
respondent’s salary from $70,000
to $100,000 effective from April
(f) In about October 2021, there was an agreement to change the
respondent’s duties and retitle it to Director of Business Development.
reflect the increase in responsibilities, the respondent would be paid an
additional amount of $40,000 per annum, payable at $10,000
per quarter;
(g) In relation to the agreed additional amount of $10,000 per quarter, there
was no evidence to support a finding that those additional
payments were payable
conditional upon the respondent meeting KPIs or other performance targets;
(h) On this basis, the respondent was entitled to be paid for the April to
June quarter 2022 in the sum of $10,000. As to the respondent’s
claim, there was no evidence that the contract contained a term for pro rata
payments and this was refused.
appellant did not articulate discrete grounds of appeal. The appeal filed is
more in the nature of a narrative in relation to
various aspects of the learned
Commissioner’s reasons for decision. Particular paragraphs of the reasons
for decision are challenged.
Whilst the appellant made broad ranging submissions
before the Full Bench on the hearing of the appeal, it is the appeal notice and
the appeal grounds that mark out what the Full Bench must consider. For ease of
reference we have numbered each of the relevant paragraphs
in the notice of
appeal. The appeal notice contains the following:
The Commissioner
was biased and it is reflected in his attitude and decision. He then rejected or
overlooked important evidence.
We make the following comments on his decision
25 refers to the Respondents non-compliance with programming orders but does not
acknowledge the valid reasons for any non-compliance.
26 fails to acknowledge that the Applicant did not make his request for
documents until 7.08pm on 21 September. The request
was voluminous and
required the Respondent to find and provide substantial documentation. This
could not be done in one day. We initially
provided some of the information by
27 September with the balance on 2 October. It could not be done any faster
27 is not correct. The Respondent supplied substantial documents in the
discovery process. 25 documents related to KPI’s.
30 is not correct. The Associate did telephone Mr Hughes but at no time
were the words “commensurate extension”
used or implied.
Mr Hughes was also not advised at any time, let alone on that call, that
any request was required before 3 November.
The Associate was a lovely man
and he gave the Respondent the strong impression that an extension of time was
not a problem.
31 denies the bleeding obvious. Mai Hughes had attended mediation and
programming hearings at the Commission and at that
time we advised the
Commission of her obvious pregnancy (she is a small lady who was huge with
twins) and that it may have an impact
on the process, although we could not
predict what that may be. We never realised this process does not have
common sense and that
a medical certificate would be needed given we were in the
hospital from 6am on 6 November, getting one would not have been hard.
Surely there is some presumption of honesty and that we would not be lying about
to the birth of twins. Please see my attached annexure
1, complaint to the
Minister who oversees this process (but has subsequently changed). I note I am
still seeking a response to my
34 defies believe (sic). Because we receive the Applicants request for documents
at 7.08pm on 21 September it is our fault
he is then delayed when we
don’t provide the mountain of documents he requested the very next
Commissioner then makes some completely ignorant and uninformed comment based on
virtually no information, and without any enquiry
of us, that “it is
apparent the respondent has been able to actively meet its obligations to the
ASX under the
Corporations Act 2001
(Cth) in the period the directions
applied.” This seems to imply that we have been able to comply with others
requirements
so we can comply with his. For starters his comment is not true,
not to mention wrong. The company has been suspended from trading
since 2 October 2023 and remains suspended due to non-compliance. The comment is
representative of the bias shown by the
Commissioner on numerous occasions
throughout this process.
Kucera used the above uninformed analysis to then make some programming orders
which completely prejudiced the Respondents. The
other witness statements needed
to be prepared after Mai Hughes’ witness statement as she is the principal
party in this. Other
witness statements would be in support of her, not the
other way around. So requiring other witness statements to be lodged before
was not a practical or workable outcome for the Respondent. Furthermore, at all
times this minimal extension was provided, Mai
was in hospital dealing with a
significant number of medical issues that arise from the premature birth of
twins. This should be
a special moment in a mother’s life, and certainly
one when she is afforded the respect to be able to focus on her babies whilst
she is in hospital. Can you believe I am even having to say this?
36 is telling. At the commencement of this process, we were advised to not be
too concerned about the legalities of the
process, and to treat this more
informally. He acknowledged neither party has legal representation or legal
background, which must
be commonplace for small claims like this. With that as
the backdrop you would expect the Commissioner should be providing important
information to the parties about how the matter is conducted. It was only in the
week leading up to the hearing that both parties
were informed that any
witnesses whose statements we wished to rely on, must attend the Court for the
full duration of the hearing.
It also would have been good to know before
organising those witness statements. Important information contained in their
would have been added to Mai Hughes’ statement if this
information was known. This led to important information not being admitted.
This prejudiced our case but made no difference to the Applicant’s
63. The Applicant acknowledges he is on Probation in the new position. To state
the obvious, probation is a period under
which you are being monitored closely
to ensure you are adequate to the role. That monitoring is assessed next to
expectations which
in this case included, not unusually, KPI’s. The
Applicant was the senior management member responsible for reporting the
to the senior management meeting each week. Senior management,
including the Applicant, were assessed with regard to those KPI’s.
all very standard in many/most businesses.
stated in the decision of the Commission, “The applicant stated that
Mrs Hughes had agreed not to roll the salary increase
into his base salary
during his probation period in the new position.” In his own words he
effectively acknowledges that this
additional (bonus) payment is tied to the
probation. If he does not perform he does not get it and he does not retain the
new position,
which he did not because he did not perform.
67 is representative of the bias regularly shown throughout this process. The
applicant said he emailed Mrs Hughes but he
could not provide evidence of
this. No email was ever received as we mistakenly believed Alain was still
awaiting a decision on his
permanent residency. We kept him employed because of
that because we did not want to risk his application for permanent residency
be rejected because he was terminated due to the impact it would have on his
68. Who gets demoted and doesn’t understand why? It was made crystal clear
to Alain that he was not performing and
someone was brought in over the top of
him to try and save the situation. As it turns out, Alain was trying to be made
when that didn’t work he tried giving 10 weeks notice over
Christmas, when our business closes down. We obviously did not accept
it was agreed he would finish 30 December 2022.
72 is further evidence of the bias encountered by the Respondent. The Applicant
accused the Respondent of perjury and fraud.
These are very serious allegations
which should have been withdrawn. All the evidence clearly shows the Applicant
applied his digital
signature to the document in question, as he had done before
and as we have on file. Nothing supports the outrageous allegations
that we made
up this document many months later and forged his signature. The fact that this
matter was not addressed forthrightly
by the Commissioner is telling of his
state of mind and bias towards the applicant and against the respondent. We will
provide details
in the appeal book from the transcript. The Commissioner writes
in his decision how accommodating he was of our 8 week old twins,
like we should
be grateful, but his treatment of our family, and the fact we even had to be
there on that date when we had no other
option for our twins, is so misogynistic
as to be alarming.
99. This important matter was ignored.
100 does not accurately reflect the questions and answers as contained in the
transcript. In the transcript the Respondent
(Appellant here) clearly says
there is a KPI document which shows the quarterly targets that needed to be met.
The Respondent then
says “but the Commissioner mentioned that I was not
able to provide that evidence anymore.” This is the evidence the
Commissioner previously did not admit because he said it would be
“ambushing” the Applicant. This is despite this information
contained in the discovery documents and in witness statements that the
Applicant had received months earlier, and this information
was actually updated
each week by the Applicant as part of his role, so he was the person responsible
for ensuring the senior management
team received this updated KPI dashboard each
week so performance could be monitored. How this can be ambushing him is
for us to understand, he knew this information intimately.
is worthy of pointing out that when reviewing the transcript the level of
coaching and assistance the Commissioner provided the
applicant is extraordinary
and not balanced by a similar level of assistance to the respondent.
107 is inaccurate. The lack of guidance on some basic matters did not assist
anyone. We consider that non lawyers should
be told that witness statements can
only be admitted as evidence if the witness is present during the hearing. We
would have put
the KPI information, some of which was contained in the witness
statement of our CFO, in Mai’s statement. Having said that,
believe the Applicant was not “ambushed” if that evidence had of
been allowed given his intimate knowledge of
that report.
key performance indicator for Alain was Active Subscribers, targets of which
were set for the quarter and the year. Alain even
had performance options which
only vested if this KPI was met. KPI’s are how his performance was
measured, and he knew it.
KPI’s on cost of acquisition per customer, ROI
of marketing campaigns, Active Subscriber numbers, etc are completely standard
in this sector and Alain was responsible for monitoring and reporting those
results, together with projecting for budgets.
decision was based on there being no evidence of KPI’s and we believe the
flawed findings throughout the process, together
with the lack of appropriate
guidance during the process, led to the omission of critical evidence that
completely changes the outcome.
This evidence was provided during discovery and
referred to in Mai’s witness statement together with specific evidence of
KPI’s that the Commissioner has not acknowledged. It is evidence the
Applicant knows intimately and cannot deny.
Relevant principles
considering the specific complaints of the appellant, we will turn to some
matters of principle first.
Procedural fairness and bias
various points in the notice of appeal narrative, the appellant contended that
the learned Commissioner did not afford the appellant
procedural fairness and
was biased in his hearing and determination of the respondent’s claim. It
was also submitted by the
appellant that the learned Commissioner demonstrated
undue leniency to the respondent in the conduct of his case. Recently, the
Bench of the Commission set out the relevant principles applicable to procedural
fairness to be afforded to a party to proceedings.
Director-General
Department of Justice v The Civil Service Association of WA (Inc.)
[2025] WAIRC 00146
, the Full Bench observed at [36]-[38] as
[36] A party to proceedings before the Commission is
entitled to procedural fairness in the conduct of their case. This requires a
party being given a reasonable opportunity to present their respective cases and
to respond to issues that may be adverse to them.
As Le Miere J observed
BHP Billiton Iron Ore v CFMEU
[2006] WASCA 49
; (2006) 151 IR
BHPB was denied right to be heard
[33] The second step is whether BHPB was denied the right to be heard in
relation to those findings. Procedural fairness does not
normally require a
Judge to disclose his thinking processes or proposed conclusions. However, a
party may be denied procedural fairness
if a Judge departs from the basis
upon which the case has been argued by the parties without notice to the
[34] The right to be heard includes a proper opportunity to present
submissions seeking to persuade a court or tribunal that the evidence
inferences from it support or fail to support any fact necessary to be
established. A restriction upon the opportunity afforded
to one of the parties
through their counsel to make submissions upon the facts that are said to be
established by the evidence deprives
a party of their right to be heard.
[37] Recently, the Court of Appeal in
considered the
relevant principles in relation to procedural fairness. The Court (Buss P,
Vaughan JA and Seaward J) said at [86]-[91]
as follows:
[86] The principles relating to procedural fairness are well settled and were
recently outlined by this court in
Defendi v Szigligeti
approved in
Frigger v Frigger
[87] It is axiomatic that a court is obliged to accord procedural fairness to
a litigant. However, to say that a court is obliged
to afford procedural
fairness is only the first step of analysis. The second step (and usually the
more critical step) is to identify
the content of the requirements of procedural
[88] Although sometimes expressed in terms referring to a necessity for a
hearing, the fundamental requirement of procedural fairness
is (relevantly for
present purposes) that a party is given a reasonable opportunity to be heard, in
other words, to present their
case by evidence, information and submissions.
However, the requirements of procedural fairness are not fixed or immutable.
fairness is directed to avoid practical injustice, and what is
necessary to avoid practical injustice will depend upon the circumstances.
[89] Generally speaking, in litigation the parties must anticipate
combinations and permutations of various findings and adduce evidence
submissions at the trial on all the potential findings of fact on the issues
litigated. Any gap in the evidence on an issue
will generally operate to the
detriment of the party carrying the burden of proof on that issue.
[90] A person to whom procedural fairness is owed is, ordinarily, entitled to
have brought to his or her attention the critical issues
or factors on which the
decision is likely to turn so as to give the person an opportunity to deal with
them. However, a decision
maker is not usually required to disclose to a person
to whom procedural fairness must be accorded the decision maker’s mental
processes, provisional views or proposed conclusions before a final decision is
made. The position may be different when the decision-maker’s
evaluation or conclusion is one that could not have reasonably been anticipated.
In this context, the observations of the Full Court
of the Federal Court in
Commissioner for Australian Capital Territory Revenue v Alphaone Pty
, are relevant:
Within the bounds of rationality a decision-maker is generally not obliged to
invite comment on the evaluation of the subject’s
The general propositions set out above may be subject to qualifications
in particular cases. Two such qualifications were enunciated
by Jenkinson J in
Somaghi at 108-109:
subject of a decision is entitled to have his or her mind directed to the
critical issues or factors on which the decision is
likely to turn in order to
have an opportunity of dealing with it:
Kioa v West
at 587 (Mason
Sinnathamby
at 348 (Burchett J);
Broussard v Minister
for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
(1989) 21 FCR 472 (Burchett
subject is entitled to respond to any adverse conclusion drawn by the
decision-maker on material supplied by or known to the subject
which is not an
obvious and natural evaluation of that material:
Minister of Immigration
and Ethnic Affairs v Kumar
(unreported, Full Court, Federal Court,
31 May 1990);
Kioa v West
at 573, 588 and
[91] This statement of principles was referred to with approval
by this court in
Apache Northwest Pty Ltd v Agostino
McKay v Commissioner of Main Roads
[38] The above general principles find expression in the Act in
which provides:
(3) Where the Commission, in deciding any matter before it proposes or
intends to take into account any matter or information that
was not raised
before it on the hearing of the matter, the Commission must, before deciding the
matter, notify the parties concerned
and afford them the opportunity of being
heard in relation to that matter or information.
Palermo v Rosenthal
[2011] WAIRC 00069
(2011) 91 WAIG 129
Full Bench commented on the right to a fair hearing in proceedings before the
Commission. In that case Smith AP and Beech CC
[73] In considering the nature of proceedings in the
Commission and the rules under which the Commission is required to act, it is
important that the nature of the jurisdiction and the powers of the Commission
to enquire into and deal with any industrial matter
application brought under
of the Act are such that the dispute
ought to be arbitrated with reasonable expedition:
MRTA of WA Inc v
[2007] WAIRC 01121
(2007) 87 WAIG 2795.
The Commission is
not a court of pleadings. It is required by
of the Act to act
according to equity, good conscience and the substantial merits of the case and
without regard to technicalities
and legal form. However, the nature of an
enquiry under
of the Act is not inquisitorial in the sense that the
Commission can undertake an enquiry outside the bounds of particulars.
Particulars
of a claim and corresponding particulars of defence to a claim are
necessary to avoid a trial by ambush. Such particulars need not
be drafted with
any finesse or to the same extent as required in a court of pleadings but must
leave the opposing party in no doubt
as to what is alleged so as to enable the
opposing party to know what case he or she is required to meet. Proceedings
an employee under
of the Act are adversial in nature
and as such, once particulars are given each party is entitled to run their case
on the basis
that the particulars set the boundaries of relevant issues in
dispute. Unless an application to amend particulars is granted, a
party should
be bound by the particulars they have provided.
Additionally,
the Full Bench in
made some observations in relation to
bias and the duty of judicial officers to conduct proceedings free from bias or
the appearance
of bias. In relation to these issues, Smith AP and Beech CC
observed as follows at [120]-[127]:
[120] The obligation on a member
of the Commission when hearing a matter is to observe procedural
fairness. This obligation includes
the duty to hear and decide
matters without bias or the appearance of bias. Bias means some
preponderating disposition or tendency,
a propensity, predisposition towards,
predilection, prejudice. It may be occasioned by interest in the
outcome, by affection, enmity
or prejudgment:
Minister for
Immigration v Jia
[2001] HCA 17
; (2001) 205 CLR 507, 563
[121] Grounds 1 and 10 raise the issue whether the appellant was denied
procedural fairness on grounds of actual bias or apprehended
prejudgment. The test of whether the state of mind of a decision
maker is affected by bias in the form of prejudgment is
as Gleeson CJ and
Gummow J described in
is one so committed to a conclusion already formed as to be incapable of
alteration, whatever evidence or arguments may be presented.
[122] Actual bias is rarely raised as a ground to impugn a decision, as
it is ordinarily sufficient to establish apprehended bias
of a decision
maker. The test to be applied in determining whether a judge is
disqualified by reason of the appearance of bias is
whether a fair-minded lay
observer might reasonably apprehend the judge might not bring an impartial and
unprejudiced mind to the
resolution of the question he or she is required to
Johnson v Johnson
[2000] HCA 48
(2000) 201 CLR
R v Lusink; Ex parte Shaw
(1980) 32 ALR 47
Livesey v NSW Bar Association
[1983] HCA 17
(1983) 151 CLR
Vakauta v Kelly
[1989] HCA 44
(1989) 167 CLR 568
[1994] HCA 30
(1994) 181 CLR 41.
The test is objective.
[123] Actual bias usually arises in the form of prejudgment. The
distinction between actual bias and apprehended bias was explained
Sun v Minister for Immigration and Ethnic
(1997) 81 FCR 71 as follows (134 - 135):
Actual bias exists where the decision-maker has prejudged the case against
the applicant, or acted with such partisanship or hostility
as to show that the
decision-maker had a mind made up against the applicant and was not open to
persuasion in favour of the applicant:
Wannakuwattewa v Minister for
Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
(unreported, Federal Court, North J, No
VG 451/1994, 24 June 1996) and
Singh v Minister for Immigration and
Ethnic Affairs
(unreported, Federal Court, Lockhart J, No 902/96, 18
October 1996). The courts have rarely found actual bias to exist. That is
principally
because, at common law, a reasonable apprehension of bias suffices
to disqualify a judicial officer. Where actual bias exists, reasonable
apprehension of bias will also exist and, consequently, courts concerned with
supervising the application of the requirements of
natural justice have not had
to go so far as to find actual bias. Another reason is that actual bias is
usually difficult to prove.
Rarely will the judicial officer expressly reveal
actual bias. However, several New Zealand licensing cases do provide some
of express actual bias. For instance, in
(1893) 11 NZLR 224
, the decision of a Licensing Committee to
refuse to renew certain licences was overturned because the Committee members
pledges in their election campaign to refuse all licences. See also the
judgment of Stout CJ in
Re O’Driscoll; Ex parte
[1902] NZGazLawRp 33
(1902) 21 NZLR 317.
Where actual bias is not expressly voiced,
it may be proved by inference from the facts and circumstances.
[P]roof of actual bias by inference from the facts and circumstances of the
case will usually involve an assessment of a series of
actions by the
decision-maker which, when taken together, form a whole picture leading to the
conclusion of pre-judgment. It is unlikely
that one single action, as distinct
from a pattern of conduct, will demonstrate actual bias.
[124] The appellant also raises an issue in grounds 1 and 10 that the hearing
was not fairly conducted. This raises the issue whether
the appellant
has had a proper opportunity to advance his defence to the applicant’s
Michael v The State of Western
[2007] WASCA 100
Steytler P with whom McLure JA and
Miller AJA observed [63]:
When the contention is one of an unfair trial, the test to be applied,
according to Kirby A-CJ and Meagher JA (who agreed with Kirby
A-CJ), is whether
the impugned behaviour has “created a real danger that the trial was
at 281. If so, the judgment must be set
E H Cochrane Ltd v Ministry of
[1987] 1 NZLR 146.
[1967] VicRp 23
, in which there had been excessive involvement or interference by the trial
judge in the conduct of the case, the Court (Winneke
CJ, Adam and Barber JJ)
regarded the test as being whether there had been “such a departure from
the due and orderly processes
of fair trial as to amount to a miscarriage of
[125] However, when considering the responsibilities of a judicial decision
maker, it is important to bear in mind the tension between
the need to control
the proceedings, on the one hand, and to be, and be seen to be, dispassionate
and impartial, on the other, with
the result that the line between acceptable
and unacceptable behaviour can be difficult to draw. This is
compounded when one of
the litigants is
self-represented:
(Steytler P)
[55]. Whilst the appellant was not self-represented he was and is
represented by a lay
Steytler P said in relation
to acceptable conduct [65]-[66]:
[I]t will often be necessary, particularly with self represented litigants,
for a trial judge to intervene in order to stop irrelevant
matters being raised
(1983) 9 A Crim R 1
at 26) and to prevent unnecessary delays
or disruptions:
[1988] 2 WLR
(1994) 73 A Crim R 91
at [13] Gleeson CJ, Gaudron, McHugh, Gummow
and Hayne JJ said:
‘At the trial level, modern judges, responding to a need for more
active case management, intervene in the conduct of cases
to an extent
that may surprise a person who came to court expecting a judge to remain,
until the moment of pronouncement of judgment,
as inscrutable as the
Indeed, a trial judge who does not intervene to prevent undue delay and to
ensure that the parties focus on the crucial issues may
criticised by an appellate court:
R v Wilson and
[1995] VicRp 11
[1995] 1 VR 163
Next, a judge is entitled to ask questions of a witness, not only for the
purpose of clarifying evidence, but also to test that evidence
[1981] Qd R 394 at 406, 415;
[2001] QCA 346
per McMurdo P, Davies and Thomas JJA),
although he or she should do no more than is absolutely necessary in that
respect and should
be careful not to take on the role of counsel.
[126] As to conduct by a decision maker that oversteps the mark of acceptable
conduct Steytler P said [71]-[72]:
Every judge knows that it is his or her duty to proceed in accordance with
due process, independently, impartially and fairly. While
judges are human, and
can be expected to react with impatience or irritation from time to time, they
are not expected to be rude:
at 133 (where the
Court said that, while judges may be strong and forceful when necessary,
they should, no matter what the provocation,
always comport themselves with
dignity). In
, at 3, Wickham J said (in what might be a
counsel of perfection) that:
‘... [F]ortunately the time has passed in the administration of the law
in this State when a litigant, a witness or counsel
is expected to put up with
impatience or rudeness from the trial judge. Such conduct on the part of the
judge may be understandable
because of illness or provocation or stress due
to the difficulties of the case, but it can never be excused. It is professional
misconduct and should be roundly condemned. Such conduct does not necessarily
lead to a miscarriage of justice but it might do so
particularly where the trial
is a trial by jury. Justice however will not often miscarry on that
ground alone; usually other factors
will be present to lead to that
There is, in this respect, an important distinction between conduct that
might be regarded only as discourteous or impatient or even
rude (in the sense
that it leads to no other consequence), on the one hand, and conduct which
(whether or not discourteous, impatient
or rude) obstructs counsel in the doing
of his or her work (
R v Hircock
[1970] 1 QB 67
at 72 per Widgery
, at 11) or which invites the jury to disbelieve the accused
or his or her witnesses, on the other. A judge’s interventions
be such as to create the impression that he or she has identified himself or
herself with one of the parties:
Tousek v Bernat
(1959) 61 SR
[127] When assessing whether the conduct of a decision maker amounts to
actual bias, apprehended bias or results in an unfair trial
the conduct is to be
assessed in the context of the whole of a
[77] (Steytler P); see
Galea v Galea
[1990] 19 NSWLR 263
(279 - 280)
(Kirby ACJ). Judges and arbitrators are human and from time do
react to provocation. As Steytler J
points out [79]:
It is important, also, to evaluate the conduct of a trial judge in the light
of any provocation offered to him or her. Judges are
not superhuman. While they
are expected to exercise restraint and, in the vast majority of cases, to resist
anything other than a
measured reaction to provocation, there will be occasions
(hopefully, very rare) when this is extremely difficult or even impossible.
such circumstances an isolated outburst, or even a few isolated outbursts, will
not necessarily result in a mistrial. So, for
the appellant was told by the trial Judge, on more than
one occasion, that he was “sick and tired of him” (at 10). However,
the appellant in that case “broke all the rules of fair combat”
despite the trial Judge’s efforts to maintain order
(at 11, per Wallace J)
and had defied the trial Judge. He had also taken advantage of the position that
had arisen (at 26, per Pidgeon
J). The Court was not persuaded that there was
any miscarriage in those circumstances.
Assistance to unrepresented parties
this case both the appellant and the respondent were unrepresented in the
proceedings at first instance, and on the appeal. The
respondent represented
himself and the appellant was represented by Mr Hughes on the appeal and by
both Mrs Hughes and Mr Hughes
at first instance. This is not a case
where one party had representation by a solicitor or agent and the other did
not. In this
sense, it is fair to observe that both the appellant and the
respondent were equally at some disadvantage. In these circumstances,
parties were entitled to receive some assistance from the Commission in the
conduct of their respective cases.
would make the initial observation that Mr Hughes, who appeared before the
Full Bench on behalf of the appellant, Mrs Hughes and
the respondent, were
obviously intelligent individuals. Both Mr and Mrs Hughes operated a
substantial business. As referred to below,
these are relevant considerations
in assessing the level of assistance to be provided to unrepresented parties, by
a court or tribunal
in the conduct of a case.
approach to the issue of assistance to unrepresented parties was considered by
the Full Bench in
Kiosses v Presidian Management Services Pty Ltd
[2018] WAIRC 00330
(2018) 98 WAIG 295.
In this case, Smith AP (Scott CC and
Emmanuel C agreeing) observed at [43]-[46] as follows:
Singh v Dhaliwalz Pty Ltd
[2013] WAIRC 00133
(2013) 93 WAIG 197
Smith AP and Beech CC (Harrison C agreeing) observed [28]:
As Bell J in
Tomasevic v Travaglini
[2007] VSC 337
observed, it is the function of a judicial decision-maker to find facts on the
basis of the evidence and in doing so is
to ensure trial fairness and to elicit
relevant evidence [127]-[128]. At [139]-[141] he explained:
[139] Every judge in every trial, both criminal and civil, has an overriding
duty to ensure the trial is fair. A fair trial is the
only trial a judge can
judicially conduct. The duty is inherent in the rule of law and the judicial
process. Equality before the
law and equal access to justice are fundamental
human rights specified in the ICCPR [International Covenant on Civil and
Rights]. The proper performance of the duty to ensure a fair trial
would also ensure those rights are promoted and respected.
[140] Most self-represented persons lack two qualities that competent lawyers
possess - legal skill and ability, and objectivity.
Self-represented litigants
therefore usually stand in a position of grave disadvantage in legal proceedings
of all kinds. Consequently,
a judge has a duty to ensure a fair trial by giving
self-represented litigants due assistance. Doing so helps to ensure the litigant
is treated equally before the law and has equal access to justice.
[141] The matters regarding which the judge must assist a self-represented
litigant are not limited, for the judge must give such
assistance as is
necessary to ensure a fair trial. The proper scope of the assistance depends on
the particular litigant and the
nature of the case. The touchstones are fairness
and balance. The assistance may extend to issues concerning substantive
legal rights
as well as to issues concerning the procedure that will be
followed. The Family Court of Australia has enunciated useful guidelines
performance of the duty.
[44] The right to a fair hearing does not entitle an unrepresented litigant
to unconfined assistance. As Samuels J in
Rajski v Scitec Corporation Pty
(Unreported, NSWCA, 16 June 1986) remarked (14):
(a) The absence of legal representation on one side ought not to induce a
court (or a tribunal) to deprive the other side of one jot
of its lawful
entitlement.
(b) An unrepresented party is as much subject to the rules as any other
litigant. The court (or tribunal) must be patient in explaining
and may be lenient in the standard of compliance which it exacts. But it
must see that the rules are obeyed, subject to any
proper exceptions. To do
otherwise, or to regard a litigant in person as enjoying a privileged status
would be unfair to the represented
[45] The aforementioned principles in
were considered by
E M Heenan J (Murray J and Le Miere J agreeing) in
Tobin v Dodd
[2004] WASCA 288
[14]. E M Heenan J considered the observations of
the Full Court of the Federal Court in
Minogue v Human Rights and Equal
Opportunity Commission
[1999] FCA 85
(1999) 166 ALR 129.
, the Full Court had regard to the general principles in
and also relevantly observed [27].
Abram v Bank of New Zealand
(1996) ATPR 41-507
at 42,347, a Full Federal
Court, faced with an unrepresented litigant’s claim that the trial judge
had not given him appropriate
assistance to present his case, made this
‘What a judge must do to assist a litigant in person
depends on the litigant, the nature of the case, and the litigant’s
intelligence and understanding of the case.’
We respectfully agree with this observation. Because the duty of the judge
varies according to the factors identified by the Full
the duty to assist an unrepresented accused in criminal proceedings is likely to
be more extensive than that imposed on a judge
hearing civil proceedings in
which one or more of the parties are not legally represented:
[1981] HCA 46
(1981) 147 CLR 512
‘Judicial Intervention in the Trial Process’ (1995) 69 ALG 365, at
[46] It is elementary that a court (and a tribunal) ought to ensure that a
self-represented litigant understands his or her rights
so that he or she is not
unfairly disadvantaged by being in ignorance of these rights. Notwithstanding
this, the court (and a tribunal)
should refrain from advising a litigant as to
how or when he or she should exercise these rights:
[2015] VSCA 298
Loftus v Australia and New Zealand
Banking Group Ltd
[2016] VSCA 308
Consideration
Grounds 1 - 8
will deal with these grounds together as they raise broadly similar issues.
They were dealt with by the learned Commissioner under
the heading
‘Compliance with the Programming Order’. He observed at [25] that
there were issues with both parties’
compliance with the directions made
in the matter, and ‘the respondent’s non-compliance was more
pronounced’. On
8 September 2023, the Commission issued
directions in relation to the conduct of the matter:
[2023] WAIRC 000739.
directions were as follows:
the parties are to provide informal discovery by
22 September 2023;
the evidence in chief in this matter is to be adduced by way of signed witness
statements which will stand as the evidence in
chief of their maker. Evidence in
chief other than that contained in the witness statements may only be
adduced by leave of the Commission;
the applicant file his evidence in chief in the form of witness statements in
the manner required by practice note 9 of 2021
together with any documents upon
which he intends to rely by 13 October 2023;
the respondent file its evidence in chief in the form of witness statements in
the manner required by practice note 9 of 2021,
together with any documents upon
which it intends to rely on by 3 November 2023;
the matter be listed for a further conciliation conference not before
3 November 2023;
there be liberty to apply on short notice.
to the request for production of documents, the appellant contended that the
respondent did not request documents of the appellant
until 7.08 pm on
21 September 2023. It was submitted that the request was for a voluminous
amount of material to be produced. In
relation to this material, the appellant
contended that the learned Commissioner’s observations at [27] of his
reasons that
the appellant did not disclose documents relating to KPIs was
incorrect. It was submitted that some 25 documents relating to KPIs
provided to the respondent.
bundle of materials commencing at AB315-376, was described in the appeal book as
‘informal discovery documents’. Whilst
a body of this material
referred to performance data for the business as a whole, and various documents
referred to ‘KPIs’,
none of the material referred to specific
performance obligations imposed on the respondent as a term of his contract of
employment.
It is not entirely clear what the learned Commissioner was
referring to at [27] of his reasons. However, given the conclusions that
reached in relation to the respondent’s claim at first instance, the most
likely was the absence of material referring specifically
respondent’s contract of employment containing any reference to the
achievement of performance objectives or KPIs as
a precondition for the $10,000
quarterly payments under his contract of employment.
should also be observed that when the nature of this material was raised with Mr
Hughes in the course of argument in the appeal,
especially the ‘KPI
Dashboard’ document, the appellant conceded that none of this material
contained any documents that
directly linked the respondent’s quarterly
payments to the achievement of individual performance targets by the respondent
(see appeal transcript p 14).
to [30] of the learned Commissioner’s reasons, reference is made to
2023, to the
effect that given the delay in the respondent filing his witness statements,
that a similar period of additional time
could be afforded to the appellant to
file their witness statements.
way of background to this request, in accordance with the programming
directions, the appellant’s witness statements were
due to be filed on
3 November 2023. Given the pregnancy of Mrs Hughes, and what
Mr Hughes contended were medical issues in relation
to the birth of twins
on 6 November 2023, the appellant made a request on 6 November 2023,
after the time the witness statements
were due, to extend the time for filing by
a further three weeks (see AB62).
the same day the Associate, on the learned Commissioner’s direction,
informed the parties that in light of:
(a) The respondent not
providing discovery by 22 September but rather 2 October 2023;
(b) That the respondent filed his witness statement four days late on 17
October 2023;
(c) That the request for an extension of time was made after the date on
which the witness statements were due;
(d) That the extension of time was opposed by the respondent; and
(e) That the appellant produced no medical evidence in support of the
extension of time, that the respondent would be provided until
10 November
2023 to file its witness statements.
further request by the appellant on the same day, for further time of at least a
week beyond 10 November 2023, was refused (see
10 November 2023, the appellant again requested an extension of time to
provide the outstanding information to 24 November 2023.
A letter from
Mrs Hughes’ obstetrician/gynaecologist Dr Love, dated
9 November 2023 (see AB65) accompanied the request. Dr
letter referred to the delivery of twins on 6 November 2023 and that
Mrs Hughes would be ‘fit and able to commence
20 November 2023’. This further request by the appellant was opposed
by the respondent.
an email on 10 November 2023 (see AB58-59) the respondent referred to a
letter to shareholders from the appellant dated 17 October
2023 and its
annual report published on 3 November 2023, stating ‘the company is
in advanced discussions regarding a potential
management buyout, with the buyer
purchasing 100% of the business’. The respondent also referred to the
initial programming
directions being made on 8 September 2023, and that
both parties had had ample time to comply.
learned Commissioner reconsidered the further requests by the appellant and the
matters raised by the respondent in reply. On
10 November 2023, in an
email from his Associate (see AB55-57), the parties were told that the
Commission had an obligation under
Industrial Relations Act
(WA) to deal with matters with all due speed. Reference was made to
the directions issued on 8 September 2023, the four day delay
respondent filing his witness statements and, that further time could be
provided to the appellant accordingly.
was noted in the 10 November email from the Associate, that three days after the
due date for the appellant’s witness statements
to be filed, which were
due on 3 November, on 6 November 2023, a request for a 21 day
extension was made by the appellant. Given
the additional time afforded to the
respondent, it was noted that the appellant was given until 10 November
2023 to file its witness
statements.
email further noted the directions issued in September 2023 were issued in
the knowledge of Mrs Hughes’ advanced pregnancy,
which may have
an impact on her capacity to meet programming directions. The financial position
of the appellant was also noted,
as referred to above. Reference was made to
the parties’ discovery obligations and, whilst noting that the
appellant’s
provision of documents after 22 September 2023 was not
intentional, it did have an impact on the respondent’s capacity to file
his witness statements on time.
all of these matters into account, the learned Commissioner extended the time
for Mrs Hughes to file her witness statement
to 20 November 2023, and
other witness statements from the appellant to be filed by 13 November
the appellant complained about the timetable ultimately imposed, the reality is
that the Commission had to take into account
not only the appellant’s
interests, but also the interests of the respondent. The respondent raised a
legitimate issue that
the business was for sale (which was not contested),
which may have impacted his capacity to bring his claim. It must also be
that both parties had from 8 September 2023 to commence preparing the
material they intended to rely on in the hearing of the matter.
Coupled with
the obligation on the Commission to deal with matters with all due speed under
, we are not persuaded that the additional time
granted to the appellant to file its witness statements, which was 17 days for
Hughes and 10 days for other witnesses, was unfair or unreasonable. We
are not persuaded that any of these grounds are made out.
to the point raised at ground 7, regarding the reference to the ASX compliance
in the email of 10 November 2023, we accept it may
have been an unnecessary
observation and potentially misleading without full knowledge of the
circumstances. However, we do not
consider it evidences bias as alleged by the
appellant, in the light of our conclusions below in relation to other grounds
allegations of a similar nature.
are not persuaded that any of these grounds are made
to this ground, the appellant complained that the parties were only informed one
week or so prior to the date of the hearing, that
for the parties’ witness
statements to be relied upon, those making the statements must be present in the
Commission to be
cross examined. The appellant complained that this was late
notice and it prejudiced the preparation of their case. The learned
Commissioner dealt with this at [36] and [47] of his reasons.
week prior to the date of hearing, on 12 January 2024, the appellant sent
an email to the Associate requesting information about
the procedure for the
hearing the following week (see AB18-19). In it, the appellant noted that one
witness resided interstate and
would be required to appear via video-link and
another witness was currently overseas and unavailable on the hearing date.
seemed to have been no advice to this effect to the learned
Commissioner’s Chambers at any time prior to this. The appellant
what procedure should apply. The Associate responded shortly after and informed
the appellant that the parties’ witnesses
will be required to attend at
the Commission in order that they may be cross-examined (see AB18).
was further stated by the Associate that if a party did not wish to
cross-examine the other party’s witnesses, they and the
Commission should
be informed of this to determine whether witness statements could be tendered in
evidence by agreement. As to the
request for a witness to give evidence by
video-link, the appellant was informed of the need to make an application on a
setting out the reasons for such a request and that the application
needed to be filed in advance of the hearing and served on the
other party, so
that they may be heard on the application.
the outset of the hearing, the learned Commissioner enquired of the parties as
to whether those who filed witness statements were
present at the proceedings.
He informed the parties that if witnesses are not present and available to be
cross-examined, the witness
statements could be tendered, but only if both
parties agreed to that course. Neither party did. Accordingly, the only witness
tendered and relied upon where of the respondent and Mrs Hughes
(see AB265).
are not persuaded that there is any basis to the appellant’s complaints in
this regard. At the outset of the matter, when
programming directions were
made, the parties were provided with guidance material including relevant fact
sheets and Practice Notes
in relation to matters of evidence and procedure in
proceedings before the Commission. The evidence fact sheet refers to witness
evidence and in particular, the preparation of outlines of evidence and
documents. It refers to the need for witnesses to be present
when giving their
evidence. Furthermore, we note that the programming directions were made by the
Commission a significant period
of time before the hearing date,
in September 2023.
parties had more than adequate time to make any enquiries in relation to the
matters that the appellant now complains of. Whilst
the Commission does provide
procedural advice and assistance, there is an onus on parties to acquaint
themselves with the practice
and procedure of the Commission, in relation to
which, there is an abundance of material available to parties on the
Commission’s
website. We note also, that on 13 November 2023, in
response to the appellant’s requests for various amendments to the
programming
directions, the Associate to the learned Commissioner provided
information to the appellant regarding the John Curtin Law Clinic,
provides free pro bono legal services to eligible small business owners, to
assist in matters of procedure and assessing legal
issues etc.
ground is not made out.
Grounds 10 and 11
grounds refer to [63] of the learned Commissioner’s reasons, where he
noted the respondent’s evidence that Mrs Hughes
agreed with the
respondent not to incorporate his salary increase into his base salary, when the
respondent initially assumed the
new position of Director of Business
Development, from 1 November 2021. The learned Commissioner referred to the
respondent’s
evidence that it was agreed with Mrs Hughes that he
would receive a $10,000 additional payment, every three months.
Paragraph 63
of the learned Commissioner’s reasons are as
The applicant stated that Mrs Hughes had agreed not to
roll the salary increase into his base salary during his probation period in
new position. He said he had agreed with Mrs Hughes that a payment of
$10,000 would be made every three months.
appellant contended that being on probation, ‘[t]o state the
obvious’, it was a period where the respondent would
be closely monitored
to ensure his performance, which involved performance expectations under KPIs.
It was submitted that as a senior
member of the appellant’s management
team, who was himself responsible for reporting all KPIs every week, he was well
are a number of difficulties with this ground. The first is that [63] of the
learned Commissioner’s reasons was not a
specific finding but rather, it
was a description of the respondent’s evidence. Furthermore, and in any
event, the issue raised
by the appellant in this regard, being an inference that
being on probation necessarily meant that the respondent’s performance
would be assessed in accordance with KPIs, necessitated the establishment on the
evidence, by the appellant, that it was a term of
the respondent’s
contract of employment that the quarterly $10,000 payments were linked to his
achievement of performance measures
including KPIs. This was the central issue
to be determined in the matter at first instance. For the reasons which we will
further below, there was no such evidence. These grounds are not
established.
to [67] of the learned Commissioner’s reasons, the appellant contended
that this was evidence of bias shown throughout the
proceedings. Paragraph 67
of the learned Commissioner’s reasons was again a narration of the
respondent’s evidence and
was not a finding. It was in the following
The applicant stated that on 19 August 2022 his
permanent residency was granted. The applicant said he sent an email to Mrs
to confirm this. The applicant also said that he went on annual leave at
or around this time.
refers to the respondent’s evidence that on 19 August 2022 he
received permanent residency. His evidence was that he sent
an email to
Mrs Hughes to advise her of this and then went on annual leave at about
that time. It is unclear as to how the appellant
contends this demonstrates any
bias. Firstly, as we have said, it is simply a narration of the
respondent’s evidence and was
not a finding. No such finding was made in
the learned Commissioner’s decision.
any event, the matter of permanent residency, and whether or not the respondent
informed Mrs Hughes of this fact, was not a matter
relevant to whether it
was a term of the respondent’s contract of employment that he receive
quarterly $10,000 payments subject
to meeting all KPIs. This ground is not
68 of the learned Commissioner’s reasons referred to the
respondent’s evidence that when he returned from annual
12 September 2022, he had a telephone call with Mrs Hughes to
inform her of his permanent residency. The paragraph is as
The applicant stated that upon his return from annual leave
on 12 September 2022, he told Mrs Hughes during a telephone call
he had been granted permanent residency. He also said that during this same
phone call, Mrs Hughes said that a number his duties
including his
management responsibilities had been passed on to his colleague
Samuel David.
the same conversation, it was the respondent’s evidence that
Mrs Hughes informed him that his managerial responsibilities,
and a number
of other duties, had been transferred to another colleague, Mr David. The
appellant asserted in relation to this ground,
that it should have been clear to
the respondent that a demotion occurred because he was failing to perform in the
position, and
another employee was required to undertake his management duties.
Whilst it was not entirely clear, the inference sought to be drawn
seems to be
that the respondent was demoted because he was not meeting his (contractually
binding, according the appellant) performance
benchmarks.
the learned Commissioner dealt with this issue in part, at [147] - [154] of his
reasons. This was in connection with the
respondent’s claim for a $10,000
payment for the July-September quarter 2022. The learned Commissioner concluded
that the effect
of the change to the respondent’s position whilst he was
on annual leave, in about August 2022, effected a return to his previous
position as Advertising Manager. The learned Commissioner found that this
occurred before the completion of the July-September quarter
the basis of these findings, the learned Commissioner concluded that the
respondent’s contract of employment made no provision
for partial payment
in the event of employment only for an incomplete quarter. He found that for
the respondent to be entitled to
the $10,000 payment for the July-September
quarter 2022, then the contract would have to have provided for this and it
It was on this basis, that the respondent’s claim for the
July-September quarter 2022 payment failed.
in this light, the issue raised by the appellant in relation to this ground
actually worked to the advantage to the appellant,
as it supported the
Commission’s finding that the respondent was not entitled to a further
payment that he claimed. This ground
is not established.
appellant referred to [72] of the learned Commissioner’s reasons when
referring to the cross-examination of the respondent.
This related to the
‘New Job Guideline’ for the promotion to the position of Director of
Business Development from 1
November 2021. The paragraph is as
The applicant initially denied signing the New Job Role,
following which Mrs Hughes provided the applicant with a copy. The
then said he could not recall signing the document. He said the New
Job Role contained a digital signature and that he did not usually
sign official
documents in this way.
issue raised was whether the respondent had signed the document. The learned
Commissioner referred to the respondent’s evidence
where he initially
denied signing the Guideline document. When presented with a copy of it in
cross-examination, the respondent
could not recall signing it and, as it
contained a digital signature, his evidence was that he would not usually sign
documents in
this manner.
it was not entirely clear how, the appellant contended that reference to this
evidence demonstrated further bias by the Commission.
As we understood the
argument, it was submitted that the effect of the respondent’s evidence in
this respect, was an allegation
by the respondent that the appellant had
fraudulently produced a document with the respondent’s signature on it.
The appellant
said that the learned Commissioner should have addressed this
matter, although it is unclear as to how this could have occurred.
also difficulties with this contention. Firstly, the paragraph referred to at
[72], is a narration of the respondent’s
evidence when being
cross-examined by Mrs Hughes. It was not a specific finding.
later in his reasons, the learned Commissioner under the heading
‘Observations about the evidence’ made comments
as to his view of
both the respondent’s and Mrs Hughes’ evidence. The learned
Commissioner stated as follows at [105]-[107]:
matters, I opted to prefer the evidence Mrs Hughes gave instead of the
applicant’s because it was more plausible and
because the applicant had no
recollection of the matter that was being asserted. An example of this was in
the applicant’s
acceptance of the New Job Role which I will deal with the
findings below.
I also accepted the applicant held concerns about his
immigration status which affected the way in which the parties agreed to vary
the applicant’s contract of employment. (Our emphasis)
[106] There were instances where I opted to prefer the applicant’s
testimony ahead of the respondent’s evidence, particularly
applicant’s evidence was supported by documentary evidence. From my
assessment of the witnesses and the evidence
they gave, this case was very much
a matter where it was reasonable to conclude the truth of what the witnesses
said fell somewhere
in the middle.
[107] It is worth noting the respondent was given ample opportunity to
provide evidence in support of its case, including by way of
documents that
established the payment of the quarterly amounts in issue, were either subject
to or conditional upon, the applicant
meeting particular KPIs. Despite the
programming directions that I referred to earlier, the respondent did not
discover any documents
of this type. Such material could have also been included
as attachments to Mrs Hughes’ witness statement but were not.
the learned Commissioner specifically dealt with the issue of the
respondent’s change in job role and title. At [124]-[125],
he referred to
this change and that it was a variation to the second contract between the
parties, which second contract had been
made in April 2021. Specifically in
relation to the issue the appellant now complains about, the learned
Commissioner said at [125]:
I accept the applicant agreed to the
change in duties and position even though in cross-examination he said he could
not recall signing
the New Job Role with an electronic signature or being a
party to the email exchange with Mrs Hughes that I have referred to at
[73] as exhibit R2.
contrary to the assertion of the appellant in this ground, the learned
Commissioner found in the appellant’s favour,
that the respondent had
signed the New Job Role document with an electronic signature or by way of email
exchange with Mrs Hughes,
referred to in exhibit R2 and dealt with
at [73] of the learned Commissioner’s reasons. This ground is
not made out.
relation to this matter, the appellant referred to [99] of the learned
Commissioner’s reasons, which referred to the respondent’s
cross-examination of Mrs Hughes. It is as follows:
applicant cross-examined Mrs Hughes. He asked Mrs Hughes about KPIs
and whether there was a document that outlined the quarterly
targets that he was
required to meet to receive a quarterly payment. Mrs Hughes said there was
a document that contained this information.
were asked of Mrs Hughes in relation to KPIs and the existence of any
documents referring to the respondent’s quarterly
targets that he was
required to achieve, so as to receive his $10,000 quarterly payment. In
response, Mrs Hughes said there was such
a document (see AB291). The
appellant submitted that this matter was ignored. That is incorrect. The learned
Commissioner did not
ignore the issue. He considered the issue of whether the
respondent’s quarterly payment claims were subject to KPIs in some
in his reasons at [137]-[146]. In particular, when dealing with the evidence of
both the respondent and Mrs Hughes, the learned
Commissioner made the
following findings at [137]-[143]:
[137] The first of these
consequences was in relation to whether the payment of the quarterly amounts was
subject to the applicant
meeting particular KPIs. This consequence was borne by
the respondent.
[138] As indicated, it is reasonable to find the change in remuneration the
applicant agreed to with Mrs Hughes was as simple as an
agreement the
applicant would, in exchange for a payment of $10,000 per quarter, take on the
New Job Role.
[139] Proof of this variation to the applicant’s contract of employment
was in part established with the May 2022 letter. It
is reasonable to
conclude the May 2022 letter is post contractual conduct of a type that
established the applicant’s contract
of employment was varied. However,
the extent to which this letter may be relied upon is limited because it
was drafted after the
applicant had agreed to take on the New Job Role and would
have been influenced by the subjective views that Mr and Mrs Hughes
on what they thought they had agreed to.
[140] While I accept the May 2022 letter may have been prepared for
auditing purposes, a reasonable person would expect that an explanation
expenditure a CEO provides to an auditor, will be good for all purposes, meaning
that any payments to the applicant would have
to be justified by reference to
agreed contractual terms. The evidence is that Mr Gundry prepared
the May 2022 letter on the information
and instructions Mrs Hughes
gave him. She also signed the letter.
[141] There was no evidence before the Commission, whether documentary or
otherwise that supported the respondent’s claim the
payment of the
quarterly amounts would be conditional upon the applicant meeting KPIs or other
performance targets.
[142] Although the May 2022 letter is badly worded and it incorrectly
describes the applicant’s job title (which was changed
when the applicant
accepted the New Job Role) the May 2022 letter does state the applicant is
entitled to a $10,000 payment, every
three months served, as discussed with Mai
and Bryan Hughes.
[143] It is reasonable to conclude that what was intended by the words
‘as discussed with Mai and Bryan Hughes’ is what
Mr Gundry had
confirmed with Mr and Mrs Hughes; the applicant would be paid $10,000
every three months served. If the respondent
had intended the quarterly amounts
would be conditional upon the applicant meeting KPIs, Mrs Hughes would have
told Mr Gundry to
include this information in the May 2023[sic] letter
which she signed.
learned Commissioner further found at [145], that Mrs Hughes’
evidence about discussions with Mr Hughes, and whether the
respondent was
entitled to receive the first quarterly payment for January-March 2022, as not
being relevant. This was on the basis
that it was the subjective views of the
appellant as to the meaning of the contract and secondly, in any event, it was
evidence as
to conduct that post-dated the variation of the respondent’s
contract of employment and on legal principle, it could not be
particular, the learned Commissioner did not accept Mrs Hughes’
evidence that the payment of the $10,000 per quarter incorporated
a contractual
obligation on the respondent to meet any KPI performance indicators, in the
absence of any reference to it in the 22
May 2022 letter, which we have set
out at [3] above.
learned Commissioner dealt with this issue based upon the evidence that was
before him. As noted above, he concluded at [141]
of his reasons that there
‘was no evidence before the Commission, whether documentary or otherwise
that supported the respondent’s
claim the payment of the quarterly amounts
would be conditional upon the applicant meeting KPIs or other performance
that on the evidence, the May 2022 letter was prepared by a senior employee
of the appellant on the instructions of Mr and Mrs
Hughes, and that it
was signed by Mrs Hughes, the letter was the ideal opportunity to confirm
that the respondent’s increase
in remuneration by way of the $10,000
quarterly payments, was subject to him achieving performance targets, including
KPIs. It did
was clearly open therefore, in the context of the evidence as a whole, for the
learned Commissioner to conclude that the respondent’s
contract of
employment did not provide for the respondent to personally meet KPIs, to be
entitled to receive the $10,000 quarterly
is important to observe that proceedings before the Commission are adversarial
in nature. That is, it is not for the Commission
to conduct a wide ranging
investigation of claims and to follow up and require parties to produce
documents to prove or to disprove,
as the case may be, a particular contention
of a party. It is for the parties to make out their particular cases, whether
or defending a claim, and the Commission can only proceed on the
evidence and subject to limited exceptions, matters raised before
proceedings.
ground is not made out.
appellant referred to [100] of the learned Commissioner’s reasons where he
comments on the cross-examination of Mrs Hughes.
Paragraph [100] is as
The applicant then asked Mrs Hughes whether the
document had been provided to the Commission, to which Mrs Hughes responded
had not been provided because the applicant had not requested the
this particular paragraph he referred to the respondent asking Mrs Hughes
whether a document confirming that his quarterly payments
were linked to the
achievement of quarterly targets, had been provided to the Commission. The
learned Commissioner records that Mrs
Hughes replied that it had not,
because the respondent had not requested it.
appellant contended that this reference to Mrs Hughes’ evidence was
not complete and that Mrs Hughes also said that the
Commission informed her
that that evidence would not be able to be provided. The appellant submitted
that this was a reference to
the learned Commissioner earlier indicating that it
was not open to the parties to ‘ambush’ each other with material
provided at the last minute.
exchange between the respondent when cross-examining Mrs Hughes appears at AB291
as follows:
TRABELSI, MR:
Yeah. My point is that there is no
I see. All right. So are you going to put that to the
TRABELSI, MR:
The document?
Yes. Are you going to put that as a question to the
TRABELSI, MR:
Oh, yeah. I did. Um - - -
So put it so that it’s on the transcript clearly.
TRABELSI, MR:
Is there a document that outline the alleged quarterly
targets that I was under in order to receive my quarterly payment?---Yes, there
TRABELSI, MR:
Has this document been provided to the Commission?---No.
Because it hasn’t been requested by the applicant.
Paragraph 13 - - -
Yes. But - so her answer is it hasn’t been requested.
Where do you want to go, now that - - -
TRABELSI, MR:
Oh, I didn’t want - - -
- - - that’s her - - -
TRABELSI, MR:
- - - to make a - - -
- - - answer?
TRABELSI, MR:
- - - comment. But I did - I don’t have to request
document. If she wants to clarify something or make a point or provide evidence
TRABELSI, MR:
- - - it’s not upon my request.
earlier at AB290, when questioned by the respondent whether a document existed
that outlined KPI’s to be met for the
quarterly payments to be made, the
following exchange took place between the respondent and Mrs
- - - sorry, in a situation of on-target earnings, an
employee would have their targets changing every single week?---No. Again, the
two KPIs that you’re referring to are different. So you’ve got KPIs
that you had to meet that was going to be based on
a quarterly basis, and there
was a KPI for the team to meet, which was also discussed on a weekly basis.
I think we can agree on that. Is there a document that would outline the KPIs
they would need to meet on a quarterly basis in order
to allegedly receive my
quarterly payment?---Yes. Um, but the Commissioner mentioned that I was not able
to provide that evidence
summary of Mrs Hughes’ evidence recorded by the learned Commissioner
at [100] was correct. It referred to the exchange
above at [70]. It did
not include the further evidence of Mrs Hughes immediately above at [71].
But the central issue was whether
such a document was in evidence before the
Commission, and it was not. Furthermore, and in any event, simply because a
was not requested by the respondent, did not mean that if such a
document existed, the appellant could not have tendered it in evidence
including by annexing any relevant documents to the witness statement of
Mrs Hughes.
relation to the ‘ambush’, this arose during the earlier
cross-examination of the respondent by Mrs Hughes. At AB278-279,
Mrs Hughes was asking the respondent questions about a ‘KPI
Dashboard’ that was used at the business as a part of monitoring
overall performance of the business. These matters were discussed at a weekly
senior management meeting. The respondent was
asked about this and said he did
not previously deny there were KPIs for the business, but staff did not have
individual targets.
The respondent said that he was responsible for
‘filling’ the KPI Dashboard.
when Mrs Hughes requested to tender a copy of the ‘KPI
Dashboard’, the learned Commissioner refused the request
because it had
not been previously disclosed, despite the earlier programming directions, and
he considered it was too late to raise
this as a new issue in the course of the
hearing. Given the sequence of the evidence referred to above, it is very likely
document referred to by Mrs Hughes at [71] above, that she said she was
not able to provide, was the same ‘KPI Dashboard’
is clear on the evidence however, that this ‘KPI Dashboard’
document, was not a document that evidenced that the respondent’s
entitlement to a $10,000 quarterly payment, was conditional upon him achieving
individual performance targets, as a term of his contract
of employment. This
was a document that was used by the business as a whole, to assess the overall
business performance. The learned
Commissioner rightly noted that the material
had not been disclosed and provided as an annexure to filed witness statements,
in accordance
with the earlier programming directions. The learned Commissioner
was correct to conclude that to this extent, it would involve a
‘ambush’ of the witness.
any event however, the appellant’s complaint as to this issue underscores
the central difficulty that the appellant had in
the proceedings at first
instance. The continual reference to these sorts of documents, which refer to
the appellant’s overall
business performance measures and progress, are
not the same thing by any means, as evidence of the appellant and respondent
to a term in the respondent’s contract of employment, that any
additional payments he would receive, were contingent upon the
achieving specified targets as a term of his contract. The appellant has
conflated the issue of overall business performance
with individual KPI and
performance targets, as a term of the respondent’s contract of employment.
There was simply no evidence
of the latter before the Commission, to support the
appellant’s contention that the respondent failed to achieve what was
of him, to deny him the contractual entitlement of the quarterly
ground is not established.
ground advanced by the appellant was a general assertion that when
reviewing the transcript, the learned Commissioner provided
coaching and
assistance to the respondent in a manner which was ‘extraordinary and not
balanced’, compared to any assistance
provided to the appellant. We have
already indicated above, the information and assistance provided to the parties
by the learned
Commissioner. Whilst the ground does not contain any
particularity, dealing with it requires a review of the transcript of the
proceedings,
in terms of interactions between the Commission and the
following references to the appeal book are to the transcript at first instance.
At AB264 the learned Commissioner explained the
respondent’s claim to both
parties. At AB265 he explained the use of witness statements for both parties
and the need for
the presence of witnesses for cross-examination, failing which,
the witness statements could be tendered by consent. We have already
on these observations set out above, and the earlier correspondence between the
appellant and the Associate.
also at AB265, the learned Commissioner made a separate conference room
available to accommodate the appellant’s infant
children and informed them
they could request a break at any time in the proceedings. At AB266, the
Commission outlined the procedure
to be followed during the course of the
hearing. A little further on at AB269, the learned Commissioner offered the
appellant some
additional time for preparation for cross-examination of the
respondent. At AB271, the Commission ensured that the respondent had
Mrs Hughes’ witness statement, in order that he was able to respond
to questions. At AB274-275, the learned Commissioner
requested Mrs Hughes
to put questions rather than statements to the respondent. This is a common
request of unrepresented parties.
at AB278, the Commission made a ruling on the ‘KPI Dashboard’ that
we have referred to above, consistent with
the programming directions earlier
made. There is nothing at all unusual about this. A little later
at AB280-281, the learned Commissioner
provided Mrs Hughes with
assistance in framing her questions, again a matter not unusual with
unrepresented parties. At AB282, at
the conclusion of the
respondent’s cross-examination, the learned Commissioner invited the
respondent to say anything further
arising from the questions that he was asked
by Mrs Hughes. Again, with unrepresented parties, as there is no
re-examination by
the parties’ representatives which would normally follow
cross-examination, in which a witness can clarify or expand upon matters
in cross-examination, the Commission’s invitation to the respondent was
entirely conventional.
little later in the evidence, at AB284, the appellant was granted a request for
an early lunch break. At AB285, on resumption after
the luncheon adjournment,
the learned Commissioner asked Mrs Hughes whether she needed any more time
before recommencing. She remained
seated at the bar table for the presentation
of the appellant’s case and the giving of her evidence. At AB289-290, and
later in the cross-examination, the learned Commissioner had to request
Mr Hughes to stop speaking to Mrs Hughes while she was giving
evidence, as in effect, he was attempting to coach the witness.
AB293, the respondent was prevented, as was the appellant, from producing
documents and seeking to tender them, that had not been
previously disclosed.
In doing so, the learned Commissioner observed that ‘the rules in relation
to both parties regarding
documents that were not put on pursuant to the
directions apply equally’. At AB296-297, the respondent, when
cross-examining
Mrs Hughes, confused her. The learned Commissioner
assisted by asking the respondent to put the question a different way, which
did. Furthermore, at AB299 in the respondent’s cross-examination of
Mrs Hughes, the learned Commissioner prevented the
respondent from making
submissions rather than asking questions. At AB303, the respondent was prevented
from asking questions because
they were not relevant.
making final submissions, the learned Commissioner asked Mrs Hughes whether
she wished to have a break before doing so and
asked her how much time she
needed. She requested and was granted a 30 minute break and was invited to
direct any request for further
time to the Associate (see AB304).
Ultimately, it was Mr Hughes who asked and was permitted to close the
appellant’s case
(see AB305).
in the above exchanges between the learned Commissioner and the parties reveals
in any way an unbalanced or inappropriate
level of assistance to the respondent.
On the contrary, the appellant’s requests for time and assistance were
granted on every
occasion a request was made. There is nothing revealed in the
transcript that shows the proceedings took place in other than an
orderly and
balanced way. In particular, given unrepresented parties were appearing before
the Commission, the nature of the interactions
between the Commission and the
parties was entirely unexceptional.
appellant’s contention that the ‘level of coaching and assistance
the Commissioner provided the applicant is extraordinary
and not balanced by a
similar level of assistance to the respondent’, as set out in this ground,
is without foundation.
ground relates to the observations by the learned Commissioner at [107] to
the effect that the appellant was given ample opportunity
to provide evidence in
support of its case including documents, to establish its assertion that the
respondent’s payments were
conditional upon meeting performance targets.
The appellant complained that these observations were inaccurate and also
reasons, there is no substance to this ground of
ground was a general comment by way of a statement that the respondent had
a key performance indicator in relation to ‘Active
Subscribers’
amongst others. It was submitted these are standard in the appellant’s
industry sector and that the respondent
was responsible for monitoring those on
behalf of the company. No specific error is identified. We do not repeat what
we have said
above about the appellant’s conflation of the overall
performance of the business, and performance measures relevant to that,
terms of the respondent’s contract of employment. This applies with equal
force to the matter raised in this ground
which is not made
in similar terms to ground 19 above, the appellant complained of the loss
of an opportunity to adduce critical evidence in
the case. It was asserted that
this was due to flawed findings and inappropriate guidance during the
proceedings. In our view,
as with the above grounds, there was no lack of
opportunity given to the appellant to advance its case. Furthermore, regarding
asserted lack of opportunity to tender material in relation to KPIs and
performance measurement, documents of the kind referred to
by the appellant,
such as the ‘KPI Dashboard’ used as a measure of overall business
performance, and other similar material
contained in the appeal book (see
AB319-376), would not have assisted the appellant at first instance. It was not
evidence supporting
the existence of a specific term in the respondent’s
contract of employment, to the effect that his quarterly payments were
individual performance criteria being satisfied.
ground is not made out.
Overall difficulty with the appellant’s case
have already noted above, a fundamental difficulty with the appellant’s
case at first instance was the absence of any evidence
before the Commission,
which established that it was a term of the respondent’s contract of
employment that the additional
$10,000 quarterly payments reflected in
exhibit A1, the May 2022 letter, were conditional upon the respondent
achieving performance
targets set out in KPIs for him personally. During the
course of argument on the appeal, to his credit, Mr Hughes, when members
the Full Bench raised this with him, conceded that there was no document in
existence that established this (see transcript of
appeal at pp 30-41). In
particular, in response to questions about these matters, the following exchange
took place at pp40-41 of
the appeal transcript:
But is there anything in either Ms Hughes’ witness statement or the
oral evidence given before Commissioner Kucera directly
discussion with the respondent, Mr Trabelsi, and what was discussed and what she
says was agreed? That’s
the critical thing.
HUGHES, MR:
Well, I think that, yes, I accept that, sir. The
respondent is saying that this letter reflects that discussion. We’re
- well, you’re saying it just reflects this discussion in that
it’s an amendment to his contract, as agreed at that time,
increasing his
salary. We’re saying that this letter was never for that purpose, should
not be taken in the context of that,
and should - no weight should have been put
on this letter at all. It was just incorrect from the beginning. So - - -
EMMANUEL C:
But the Chief Commissioner’s question is a bit
different. He’s putting to you, or asking you, where’s the evidence
you point to about the discussion between Ms Hughes and the then-applicant in
relation to that 31 October discussion? So there’s
a line in there, in the
paragraph you pointed to. Those discussions were all about this being
performance-based. But what is the
other evidence that My Foodie Box put on
HUGHES, MR:
Fair enough. Exactly, and I think we sort of alluded to
that. It’s all inferred and circumstantial evidence surrounding the
overall performance of the position, what the position was for, the general
commercial nature of that, and how this is ordinarily
structured in these ways
for such positions, that you don’t, you know, you - to be probationary and
to be provided with a quarterly
payment, there had to be some catalyst for why
that was like that. And all of that is inferred from the thing. But is there any
direct evidence? No, I can’t think we can point to anything
that’s been put forward.
was nothing specific in Mrs Hughes’ witness statement to this effect,
other than a general comment in response to the
respondent’s witness
statement, about ‘discussions’ between Mr and Mrs Hughes
and the respondent and those discussions
being ‘performance based’
(see AB72). However, as was noted by the learned Commissioner at [144] of his
reasons, the
evidence was Mr Hughes did not take part in the October 2021
meeting with the respondent regarding his appointment to the Director
Business Development position (see AB277). Accordingly, the reference in
the letter of May 2022, confirming the quarterly payment
(albeit that the
letter was written well after the event), to these ‘discussions’
between the three of them, did not
support the appellant’s
contentions.
is also despite the letter of May 2022 being the ideal opportunity to
document the alleged link between the respondent’s
quarterly payments and
the need for him to achieve specific targets, as a condition to be met in order
to receive any payments.
The absence of any reference to such a link in the
letter, weighs heavily against the appellant’s contentions in this regard.
The reference in the letter, to the additional payments, as the learned
Commission found at [89] of his reasons, was entirely consistent
additional remuneration being payable to the respondent for the increased
responsibility and scope of the new position he was
appointed to from 1 November
Additionally,
there was no oral evidence from Mrs Hughes referring specifically to an
agreement that the respondent’s quarterly
payments were conditional on him
meeting individual and specified KPI or other performance measures. Generalised
statements by the
appellant that the respondent’s new job was
‘performance based’, were insufficient to establish the
appellant’s
contentions at first instance. They blurred the important
distinction between an employee’s job responsibilities being for
of a business’ overall performance, on the one hand, and an employee being
entitled under their contract of employment,
to receive part of their
remuneration, only conditional on the achievement of particular performance
measures of the business, on
the other. In the absence of any oral or
documentary evidence of this kind, the learned Commissioner’s conclusions
of his reasons, set out above, were entirely open to him and indeed,
were the only conclusions that the Commission could have reached
the foregoing reasons, the appeal should be dismissed.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (248 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter