URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WASCA/2025/164.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:08:31
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
JSP -v- THE STATE OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA [2025] WASCA 164 (7 November 2025)
COURT OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
THE COURT OF APPEAL
-v- THE STATE OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
[2025] WASCA 164
OCTOBER 2025
DELIVERED :
NOVEMBER 2025
CACR 4 of 2025
STATE OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
COURT OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
CC PE 665 of 2023 & CC PE
667 of 2023
law - Appeal against conviction - Where appellant convicted after trial of two
counts of aggravated sexual penetration without
consent - Where appellant
offended in company - Where appellant was well known to complainant - Where
complainant gave evidence that
she recognised the appellant in circumstances
where complainant was under the influence of cannabis and had been asleep -
Where offending
took place in dark bedroom - Where there were other young males
in the house - Whether trial judge made a wrong decision on a question
declining to give himself a
direction - Whether the recognition warning given was sufficient in
circumstances of the case
Legislation:
Court of Western Australia Act 1988
Procedure Act 2004
to appeal granted
Representation:
B E F Tooker
Solicitors:
Aboriginal Legal Service
Director of Public
Prosecutions (WA)
referred to in decision(s):
OF THE COURT
31 July 2024, the appellant and his co‑offender, SW, were convicted
after a judge‑alone trial in the Children's Court
non‑consensual sexual penetration offences against CLS, whilst in the
company of each
offending occurred on the afternoon of Sunday 8 December 2019. At that
time, the appellant was aged 14 years and 6 months, SW
12 years and 9 months, and CLS was aged 16 years and
the appellant and SW were both very well known to CLS. SW was her first cousin
and, although there was no familial relationship
with the appellant, she
nevertheless regarded him basically as part of the family and always called him
'brother'. They all used
to hang out together.
gave evidence that she recognised both boys as the two males who had offended
against her even though they had done so in a darkened
room, and at a time when
she was significantly intoxicated due to cannabis use. Further, the appellant
made certain admissions which
corroborated the recognition evidence of CLS.
appellant appeals his conviction for both offences on the following grounds,
advanced in the alternative:
(a) There was a wrong decision on a question of law by the trial judge because
his Honour declined to give himself a direction as
to the use of the
recognition evidence.
(b) A miscarriage of justice was occasioned by the trial judge's refusal to
direct himself about the dangers of identification/recognition
reasons which follow, the directions which the trial judge gave himself on the
relevant issues were adequate to the particular
circumstances of the case.
Moreover, even if there had been some deficiency, it would be fanciful to think
that the deficiency could
have affected the judge's reasoning towards guilt,
especially given the corroborative admissions made by the appellant.
appeal must be dismissed.
The trial judge's findings as to the circumstances of
the offending
trial judge found that on the afternoon of 8 December 2019, CLS was at the
CLS had smoked a considerable amount of cannabis and was heavily affected by the
She went to her mother's bedroom to
and the appellant were also present at the home that afternoon. They knew CLS
well and knew that she was intoxicated because
of her cannabis use that
Either immediately or shortly after CLS went to the bedroom, SW followed her.
The appellant did not immediately do
pushed CLS on the bed and sexually offended against her, including by
penetrating her vagina with his penis and without her
At some time while SW was doing that, the appellant opened the door to the
bedroom, entered inside, and closed the door. CLS saw
his face and knew it was
The appellant was not charged with any involvement with SW's offending in this
the appellant was watching SW sexually assault CLS, the appellant was
He later joined in and the events in the bedroom then went on for some time.
The judge found that the chronology of those events
was not certain because
there were gaps in CLS's memory due to her cannabis
intoxication.
Nevertheless, the judge found CLS's memory was reliable concerning the fact of
the events having occurred at some point when both
the appellant and SW were
together with her in the bedroom that
the appellant joined CLS and SW on or near the bed, he was encouraged and
directed by SW, who, even though he was younger, was
the leader in the
The judge found that both boys were acting together, enabling and aiding each
other from the point that the appellant moved from
the door to where SW and CLS
were on the
They joined in a common purpose to sexually assault CLS. She felt overwhelmed
because there were two of
judge was satisfied that CLS was so affected by cannabis that she was physically
He found that both boys moved her around, held her up, held her arms, and were
physically rough with her. CLS was compliant and
not resisting, frozen in her
mind, scared, and in
While one of the boys closed the curtains to the bedroom, with the result that
it was dark in the room, it was not as dark as it
would have been if it was
night‑time.
one point, the appellant held CLS's arms behind her back when she was on the
floor and while that happened, SW put his penis in
her mouth without her
At the time that happened, SW was sitting on the bed and CLS felt pain in her
chest because of how the appellant was holding her
arms behind her. He was
enabling and aiding SW and could see exactly what SW was
The judge accepted CLS's evidence, thereby justifying his conclusion that the
first charge against the appellant was established
beyond a reasonable
another point, when the appellant was lying on the bed behind CLS, the judge was
satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the appellant
briefly penetrated her
vagina with his penis and without her
He withdrew his penis and came quickly, ejaculating on her buttocks. The judge
accepted CLS's evidence, thereby justifying his conclusion
that the second
charge against the appellant was established beyond a reasonable
Relevant aspects of the trial judge's reasoning towards
his findings as to guilt
is evident from the foregoing summary of his findings as to guilt - and as was
common ground both below and in this court - the
finding of guilt rested
entirely on the trial judge accepting that CLS gave reliable and credible
evidence of the events of the offending
and of her recognition of SW and the
appellant as the two males who had offended against her.
trial, the appellant had disputed the reliability of CLS's evidence that he had
offended against her. It was also suggested to
CLS that she might have been
having flashbacks to the occasion when her father had sexually assaulted her and
that neither boy had
actually offended against her at all.
trial judge's reasons reveal that he acknowledged that the State's case rose or
fell according to whether he accepted CLS's evidence.
He relevantly directed
himself in these
Although there is some evidence of alleged admissions by each of the boys
subsequent to what happened that Sunday, ultimately, the
State's case in respect
of each particular charge stands or falls on [CLS's] evidence. She is the only
witness to give direct evidence
as to what happened during the events charged.
This case does not require what the law calls a
But as I will come to, there is a significant consideration which is relevant to
my assessment of [CLS's] evidence, being
her cannabis intoxication at the time
of the charged conduct.
Accordingly, I have decided that I must scrutinise [CLS's] evidence very
carefully, and be cautious in my conclusions, or rather,
in drawing those
conclusions. I must be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt as to the
truthfulness, accuracy and reliability of [CLS's]
evidence in relation to a
charge I am considering before making a finding of guilt.
Now, I have considered in this case whether it is necessary to warn myself about
the dangers of, or potential dangers of, [CLS's]
recognition of [SW] and [the
appellant] as the persons who assaulted her, or allegedly assaulted her. Beyond
saying that I well
know that depending on the circumstances, even close
relatives can mistakenly recognise a family member, I decline to give myself
specific recognition warning in the circumstances of this matter.
his reasons, the judge repeatedly referred to the need carefully to scrutinise
CLS's evidence both as to her credibility and
reliability.
As he said he would, he carefully considered the impact of CLS's cannabis
intoxication on her credibility and reliability. In that
regard, he found CLS's
memory was fragmented because she was stoned and, in her words, 'out of
and falling asleep at the time the
memories were laid
He could not conclude how much was missing from her memory. Accordingly, he had
to focus on the credibility and reliability of what
she said she did
By the time she stopped smoking that afternoon, she had lost her balance and
felt physically
He regarded the effect of that cannabis intoxication to be the most significant
reliability consideration in his assessment of CLS's
evidence in relation to the
Nevertheless,
on the issue of CLS's recognition evidence he
I found [CLS's] rejection of the defence case on the possibility of mistaken
identification to be completely compelling and objectively
true as was her
evidence‑in‑chief about that. She knew [SW] and [the appellant]
very well. She knew their builds, could
describe them - but, most importantly,
she knew them as people that - in [SW's] case, that she had grown up with, as a
cousin‑brother.
In [the appellant's] case, as someone who was a friend, a
schoolmate and someone who was regularly at the house.
And she did not mistake either of them for her
father or anybody else on this Sunday afternoon.
She was completely convincing in [answers to cross‑examination on some
inconsistencies]. [CLS's] account in cross‑examination
of her mental
health and prescription drug use was unguarded, insightful and obviously true -
similarly, her evidence about her cannabis
use. [CLS] did not attempt to
minimise the effect of cannabis on her, but maintained that what she could
recall was true. In conclusion,
I found [CLS] to be a credible, compelling and
convincing witness. Her account was plausible.
may be interpolated that the trial judge's finding - that CLS knew SW and the
appellant well - was not challenged in this court
or below and was strongly
supported by the evidence which the trial judge had heard. CLS gave evidence
that the appellant often
came and visited her mother's house to hang out with
the boys who stayed
Indeed, she knew the appellant from school because she had attended primary
school in the same class as
She said SW was her first cousin and they lived
SW was part of the family. The appellant too was basically (but not
biologically) part of the family. She had always called him
He would come and visit the house sometimes three or four times a week. In
response to a suggestion that when he came over he was
almost always hanging out
with 'the boys', she responded 'we all hung out together really because we were
very close in
trial judge specifically acknowledged the distinction between a witness's
credibility and
reliability.
He noted that his findings as to CLS's reliability were assisted by a number of
considerations. Two in particular should be mentioned.
the trial judge found CLS's credibility was supported by the recent complaint
evidence from her mother and from her elder sister.
In that regard he
Now, I am satisfied that on Monday morning, 9 December, [CLS] went to her
mother, who was asleep in her own bed, and woke her up.
[CLS] said that she was
in pain in her vagina and tummy.
She said words to the effect that [SW and the appellant] raped her and they took
turns. To [her mother], [CLS] looked pale and in
pain. [Her mother] went to
get [CLS's elder sister]. But [she] was already up, having been woken by [CLS's
younger sister]. And
she came into the room. To [CLS's elder sister], [CLS]
appeared flat and in pain. [CLS] said that she was in pain in her private
parts. [CLS] said that [the appellant and SW] had come into the room multiple
times and she believed or thinks they had raped her.
I'm satisfied that [CLS's] complaint of being raped by both boys was immediate.
And together with her state of being in pain, I
accept, in that regard, the
observations of [CLS's mother and elder sister] is consistent with her complaint
of the charged conduct
regarding both boys. And it assists me in assessing her
credibility and her reliability.
I reject the defence submission that [CLS] saying 'thinks' or 'believes'
indicated uncertainty on her part. She was still processing
a traumatic event,
in circumstances where she had woken up after being stoned. Saying 'I think'
was her verbalising that processing
and, perhaps, even an expression of
disbelief at what had happened.
the trial judge also found support for his conclusions as to CLS's reliability
in subsequent events concerning the appellant in
which, when confronted by CLS
and her family members concerning his conduct, the appellant apologised and made
general statements
apparently concerning the events in question. Although the
judge did not regard the statements to be specific enough to be regarded
admissions of the particular offending, the judge did regard them to be
corroborative of the reliability of CLS's evidence.
trial judge made these findings as to what had
I'm satisfied that, at some point between 9 December and when police
attended on 11 December, [the appellant] returned to [the house
offending occurred] on foot. It's not necessary to conclude how that came
that she spoke to [the
appellant's] mother, likely, on the Monday.
I've heard slightly different versions of what happened at the door and who
answered it. The recollection and impressions of honest
witnesses can vary.
[CLS's elder sister's] evidence, that I accept and fits with [CLS], is that
[another boy in the care of CLS's
mother] answered the door. [CLS's elder
sister] was there shortly after. And [CLS] arrived after that. [CLS's mother]
mother heard a commotion at the door. And [CLS's mother] also came to
When [CLS's elder sister] was at the door with [the other boy], she - or perhaps
both of them, asked [the appellant], 'What did you
do?' [The appellant],
initially, denied doing anything. And I infer that was in relation to [CLS].
I am satisfied that in the words of [CLS's elder sister], he was then hounded.
I'm satisfied that was in the nature of a verbal
argument or disagreement with
him to the effect that, 'Things have changed. We know what's up.' It may even
be - in fact, it's likely
to have been in much stronger terms than that.
I'm satisfied that [the appellant] then crumbled and apologised. He did so
repeatedly. He never identified what he was saying sorry
for. But he did also
It wasn't just me. What about [SW]?
At which point, [CLS] and [CLS's mother] were at the door. [The appellant] was
then pushed away from the door into the yard and
slammed to the ground. That
was probably by [the other boy], but [CLS's elder sister] might well have been
involved as well. I'm
satisfied that he was hit, and in [CLS's] words 'given a
flogging'. She was one of those who hit him.
Through that, when he was being pushed onto the lawn, on the ground, and being
flogged, and indeed after, when he got up and was
standing at the front and on
the verge, [the appellant] continued to apologise and say:
It wasn't just me. I'm sorry. I didn't want to do it. What about [SW]? [SW]
made me. Does [SW] get a flogging?
[The appellant] never said, 'I don't know what I've done wrong.'
Now, I'm satisfied those various statements made by [the appellant] - sorry,
were made by [the appellant].
trial judge then specifically considered how the statements made by the
appellant could be used. The judge found the initial
denial was not true, but
the other statements were true and were made deliberately by the
The appellant was apologising for something that he did together with SW in
relation to CLS. The judge found that he could not conclude
that the statements
could be regarded as admissions of any particular sexual misconduct and when he
came to consider the charges
against the appellant, he did do so from the
perspective of the appellant not having made admissions of sexual
misconduct.
However, the judge did conclude that he could look to see whether the general
statements made by the appellant did fit with what
CLS had said
His conclusion was that knowing what the appellant said in the circumstances
recorded above had assisted him when he had thought
reliability in relation to the charges.
Relevant legal principle
order to evaluate the appellant's challenge to the directions which the trial
judge gave himself concerning CLS's recognition
evidence it is necessary first
to identify relevant aspects of legal principle.
Jury directions where identification or recognition is
fundamental task of a trial judge is to ensure a fair trial of the accused. In
RPS v The Queen
the High Court explained that proper performance of that
will require the judge to instruct the jury about so much of the law as they
need to know in order to dispose of the issues in the
case. No doubt that will
require instructions about the elements of the offence, the burden and standard
of proof and the respective
functions of judge and jury. Subject to any
applicable statutory provisions it will require the judge to identify the issues
the case and to relate the law to those issues. It will require the judge to
put fairly before the jury the case which the accused
makes. In some cases it
will require the judge to warn the jury about how they
reason or about particular
care that must be shown before accepting certain kinds of
(original emphasis) (footnotes
category of cases in which the trial judge will be required to formulate such a
warning is the category in which disputed identification
evidence represents a
significant part of proof of guilt of the offence charged. For cases in that
category, special rules have
been formulated.
special rules were explained in
Domican v The
the High Court
Whether the trial judge is bound to refer to an evidentiary matter or argument
ultimately depends upon whether a reference to that
matter or argument is
necessary to ensure that the jurors have sufficient knowledge and understanding
of the evidence to discharge
their duty to determine the case according to the
evidence. Consequently, the conduct of the case necessarily bears on the extent
to which the judge is bound to comment on or discuss the evidence. Discussion
or comment which is justified or required in one case
may be neither required
nor justified when a similar case is conducted in a different way.
The foregoing statements are applicable to all criminal cases including those
where the prosecution relies on identification evidence
as the whole or part of
the proof of guilt of an offence. Nevertheless, the seductive effect of
identification evidence has so frequently
led to proven miscarriages of justice
that courts of criminal appeal and ultimate appellate courts have felt obliged
to lay down
special rules in relation to the directions which judges must give
in criminal trials where identification is a significant issue.
Whatever the defence and however the case is conducted, where evidence as to
identification represents any significant part of the
proof of guilt of an
offence, the judge must warn the jury as to the dangers of convicting on such
evidence where its reliability
is disputed. The terms of the warning need not
follow any particular formula. But it must be cogent and effective. It must be
appropriate to the circumstances of the case. Consequently, the jury must be
instructed 'as to the factors which may affect the
consideration of [the
identification] evidence in the circumstances of the particular case'. A
warning in general terms is insufficient.
The attention of the jury 'should be
drawn to any weaknesses in the identification evidence'. Reference to counsel's
is insufficient. The jury must have the benefit of a direction which
has the authority of the judge's office behind it. It follows
that the trial
judge should isolate and identify for the benefit of the jury any matter of
significance which may reasonably be regarded
as undermining the reliability of
the identification evidence. (footnotes omitted)
however, the law recognises that the category of case in which disputed
recognition evidence represents a significant part
of proof of guilt of the
offence charged is not necessarily to be treated in the same way as the disputed
identification evidence
category of case, although it may be. Whether it should
be so treated will depend on the circumstances of the case.
Mills v The State of
Western Australia
, McLure JA
The distinction between 'recognition' and 'identification' evidence has long
been recognised:
Attorney‑General (Northern Ireland)
Kelly v The Queen
which was approved in
Al‑Hashimi v The
. Recognition cases involve the recognition of a person previously
known to the witness and identification cases involve the subsequent
identification of a person by a witness who first saw that person at or near the
crime scene.
is required where evidence as to identification represents any significant part
of the proof of guilt of an offence. In
broad terms, that involves warning the
jury that an honest and convincing witness may be mistaken when giving
identification evidence
and the judge putting the authority of his or her office
behind any matter of significance that may be regarded as undermining the
identification evidence. The trial judge did not direct the jury in those terms
in this case.
Whether or not a full or partial
required where evidence as to recognition represents any significant part of the
proof of guilt depends on the circumstances
of the case:
Davies v The King
(181). Those circumstances include the degree of familiarity of the witness
with the suspect, the circumstances in which the suspect
had previously been
seen by the witness, and the circumstances in which the suspect was alleged to
have been seen by the witness
at or about the time of the crime:
Carr v The Queen
[61] (Blow J), followed by this court in
Smith v The State of
Western Australia
[68]. Thus, it is necessary to pay detailed attention
to the evidence and the issues in dispute at trial. (citations
Buss JA separately explained in
In general, identification evidence describes the evidence of a witness who
identifies an accused as the offender in circumstances
where the witness first
saw the accused at or near the crime scene. In general, recognition evidence
describes the evidence of a
witness who recognises an accused as the offender in
circumstances where the accused was previously known to the witness or had
been seen by the witness other than at or near the crime scene.
Where the witness's previous knowledge of the accused was tenuous,
witness's previous sighting of the accused was fleeting, the witness's evidence
that he or she recognised the accused at or
near the crime scene may, in
substance, resemble 'identification evidence'. The nature and character of the
witness's previous connection
with the accused is the crucial issue, rather than
the characterisation of his or her evidence as 'recognition'
same point was made more recently in the joint judgment of Buss P and Mazza
and Vaughan JJA in
v The State of Western Australia [No
is mandated for cases involving identification. It is not mandated for cases
involving recognition. This is because, generally
speaking, recognition
evidence is more reliable than a stranger's evidence of identification.
Nevertheless, ordinarily in cases
involving recognition, a jury is reminded that
mistakes in recognition, even of close relatives or friends, are sometimes
However, there will be recognition cases which,
having regard to the particular circumstances, involve just as much danger of
identification as cases involving the identification of a stranger. In
these cases, a
required. Observations to this effect were made by Blow J in
Carr v The Queen
and by Kaye J in
Cox and Sadler (Ruling No 12)
. (citations omitted)
The trial judge's obligations in a judge‑alone
trial in the Children's Court
relevant aspects of the obligations of a trial judge in a judge‑alone
trial are identified in
Criminal Procedure Act 2004
and procedure to be applied
(3) If any written or other law -
(a) requires information or a warning or instruction to be given to the jury in
certain circumstances; or
(b) prohibits a warning from being given to a jury in certain circumstances,
the judge in a trial by a judge alone must take the
requirement or prohibition into account if those circumstances arise in the
of the trial.
verdict and judgment
(1) In a trial by a judge alone -
(a) the judge may make any findings and give any verdict that a jury could have
made or given if the trial had been before a jury;
(b) any finding or verdict of the judge has, for all purposes, the same effect
as a finding or verdict of a jury.
(2) The judgment of the judge in a trial by a judge alone must include the
principles of law that he or she has applied and the findings
of fact on which
he or she has relied.
(3) The validity of a trial judge's judgment is not affected by a failure to
comply with
subsection (2).
Children's Court of Western
Australia Act 1988
(WA) operated to require the trial judge in the
present case to apply s 119 and
obligations imposed by s 119(3)(a) and
Criminal Procedure Act
Fleming v The
where the High Court discussed the equivalent provisions in
Criminal Procedure Act 1986
Bropho v The State of
where this court applied that analysis to
[T]here may be a breach of [s 119(3)(a)] with respect to the requirement to
take a warning into account. The present appeal is put
as such a case.
[Section 119(3)(a)] is framed in a fashion which differs from that of
[s 120(2)] and which emphasises the particular
importance attached by the
legislature to the requirements of the law with respect to warnings.
[Section 120(2)] requires the inclusion
of principles of law applied and of
factual findings relied upon, whilst [s 119(3)(a)] obliges the judge to
take the particular warning
into account.
The obligation imposed by [s 119(3)(a)] 'to take the warning into account'
is not only to be discharged but also to be seen to be
discharged. The means by
which the obligation may be discharged is that indicated in [s 120(2)],
namely the inclusion in the reasons
for judgment of the particular requirement
for a warning among the principles of law applied by the judge. The various
requirements
that warnings be given have been expressed as rules of law or
practice. The failure to give such a warning does not always lead
setting aside of a conviction. But that does not mean that it is not a
principle of law within the terms of [s 120(2)].
The judge is obliged by
[s 119(3)(a)] to take the warning into account and in doing so the judge
applies a principle of law.
The result is to require the recording and heeding of a warning, if one is
called for in the particular case, and the giving of effect
to it in a real
sense by stating reasons why, notwithstanding the warning or as a consequence of
it, a particular verdict is reached.
A mere recording or statement of it,
without more, would amount to an empty incantation. If these criteria are not
satisfied in
a particular case, then the judge is to be taken as not discharging
the obligation imposed by [s 119(3)(a)] that the warning be taken
account. (footnotes omitted).
Any deficiency in the direction concerning recognition
evidence must be shown to be material
the present case, the appellant contends that there was a failure to comply with
s 119(3)(a)
and not a failure to comply with
A failure to
comply with
s 119(3)(a)
decision on a question of law within the second limb of
Criminal Appeals Act 2004
a failure may also mean that a miscarriage of justice has been occasioned,
within the meaning of the third limb of that
section, because justice according
to law, to which the appellant was entitled, included compliance with the
mandatory requirements
s 119(3)(a).
either conclusion to be reached, the failure would have to be material in the
sense described by the High Court in
namely it could realistically have affected the reasoning of the judge to the
verdict of guilty that was returned by the judge in
the criminal trial that
occurred. In this context, 'could' is to be understood as meaning 'having the
capacity to', and 'realistically'
distinguishes the relevant assessment of the
possibility of a different outcome from a possibility that is fanciful or
improbable.
The threshold to establish that an error or irregularity is
material must be satisfied by the appellant, but that burden is not
relevant propositions may be distilled from the foregoing identification of
relevant legal principle.
is mandated for cases in which disputed identification evidence represents a
significant part of proof of guilt of the offence
the extent of the direction which is required where evidence as to recognition
represents a significant part of the proof of guilt
will depend on the
circumstances of the case. Some cases may call for a full
In others it may be sufficient for the judge merely to direct the jury that
mistakes in recognition, even of close relatives
or friends, are sometimes
notwithstanding that the principles discussed in
and like cases
will be well‑known to experienced judges, in a judge‑alone trial a
judge must formulate a direction which
is apposite to the circumstances of the
case bearing in mind those principles and must express that direction in the
if the circumstances of a recognition case required a judge to give a direction
or warning which the judge did not give, then the
judge will have made a wrong
decision on a question of law within the second limb of
Criminal Appeals Act
and that error
might also occasion a miscarriage of justice, within the meaning of the third
limb of that section. In both cases
an appellant would have to establish that
the failure was material in the sense explained in
Disposition
the two grounds of appeal were construed literally, they would be rejected on a
narrow basis. The trial judge did not decline
to give himself a direction as to
the use of the recognition evidence. Nor did he refuse to direct himself about
the dangers of
such evidence. Rather, he declined to give himself any more
specific warning than to remind himself that he well knew that depending
circumstances, even close relatives can mistakenly recognise a family
it would not be fair to the careful argument of appellant's counsel to construe
the grounds of appeal so narrowly. It was
evident that the real point advanced
by appellant's counsel was that the trial judge's error was in failing to give a
appellant submitted that the elements of such a direction would necessarily have
encompassed: (1) an explicit warning as to
the seductive effect of
recognition evidence honestly and sincerely believed by the witness; (2) an
explicit warning as to the need
to approach the task of assessing the
reliability of that evidence with a special degree of caution; (3) an
explicit warning that
the experience of criminal courts was there was a risk of
error and possible wrongful conviction even where such evidence is given
friends or relatives familiar with the accused; and (4) a specific
identification of the particular circumstances relied upon
by the defence that
would impact on the assessment of the reliability of the evidence.
to point (4), appellant's counsel identified five
considerations:
(a) CLS's cannabis intoxication, the fragmented and non‑chronological
state of her memory and the fact that her memory was
in the form of
flashbacks.
(b) The darkness of the room where the offending took place.
(c) The presence of other males at the home that afternoon.
(d) A suggestion that CLS had later in the evening in question made statements
suggesting uncertainty about her identification of
SW's presence in the room,
which uncertainty should sound adversely to her recognition evidence concerning
the appellant because
she had greater familiarity of SW.
(e) A suggestion that CLS had reasoned towards the positive identification of
the appellant by a process of
elimination.
appellant's counsel submitted that a
must be given where there are established the twin considerations of:
(1) identification of the appellant representing
a significant part of the
proof of guilt of the charged offences; and (2) the reliability of that
evidence being disputed. She submitted
that in the context of this case, both
those considerations were established and accordingly, as a matter of law, the
trial judge
was required to give himself a
of the nature of that referred to in the previous two paragraphs.
submission must be rejected. It may be accepted that the two considerations to
which counsel referred existed in this case.
However, CLS's evidence that she
recognised the appellant as one of the two males who had offended against her
must be categorised
as recognition evidence, not identification evidence.
Accordingly, the question whether it called for a
suggested by the appellant fell to be determined by the application of the
principles discussed in
. The question
required a consideration of all the circumstances of the case, including the
degree of familiarity of CLS with the
appellant, the circumstances in which the
appellant had previously been seen by CLS, and the circumstances in which the
was alleged to have been seen by CLS at or about the time of the
the present case the evidence did reveal that there were young males present at
the home that afternoon, other than the appellant
and SW. But all were well
known to CLS. Importantly, as his Honour found, CLS knew the appellant as
a friend, schoolmate and someone
who was regularly at her home. She knew him
and his physique well and she saw the appellant's face when he came into the
Apart from that, the extent of the interaction with the appellant during
the offending gave her ample opportunity to observe and
recognise him. The
possibility that she had mistaken one of the other males for him was speculative
at best, but any merit which
the speculation might have had disappeared
consequent upon the evidence of the circumstances of the appellant's apology
when confronted
by CLS and her family as described at [
] above. The latter evidence strongly
corroborated CLS's recognition of the appellant as the other male present in the
bedroom with
SW on the afternoon in question. Her evidence gained further
support from the recent complaint evidence.
those were not the only circumstances which were relevant to be considered as to
the extent of any warning which the judge needed
to give himself on the risks
posed by recognition evidence in the context of the case. That issue came to be
considered in a context
in which the trial judge had already directed himself
that, particularly in light of her cannabis intoxication, he had to scrutinise
CLS's evidence very carefully, and he had to be cautious in drawing conclusions
as to whether he was satisfied beyond reasonable
doubt as to the truthfulness,
accuracy and reliability of her evidence.
all the circumstances, the trial judge must be taken to have directed himself
consistently with the first paragraph of the quote
set out at [
] above and to have concluded that
nothing further was called for. The circumstances of the case supported the
choice which the trial
judge made that no more specific warning about
recognition evidence was necessary. That warning - when taken with the
concerning scrutiny of CLS's evidence - was a sufficient response to
the considerations identified by the appellant's counsel to
which reference has
been made above.
if, contrary to the foregoing evaluation, the trial judge was wrong not to give
himself a more specific warning; the question
which would then arise is whether
such a warning could be regarded as material in the sense explained by the High
addressing that question, one must appreciate the issue is one of capacity of
the hypothesised, more specific warning to affect
the reasoning towards guilt
and that the burden of demonstrating materiality is not onerous.
forming a view on materiality, it is appropriate to recognise, as counsel for
the respondent submitted, that in his reasons for
judgment the trial judge
specifically addressed four out of five of the issues which the appellant
identified as having given rise
to the need for a more thorough recognition
warning. The remaining matter was a submission which was not explicitly
addressed but
was, correctly, implicitly rejected as of no moment.
the trial judge's reasons specifically addressed the significance of CLS's
cannabis intoxication and the fragmented and non‑chronological
her memory. His Honour addressed the question of flashbacks and
[CLS] self‑identified that her memory was in the form of flashbacks. I'm
satisfied what she means by that, is she does not
have a complete start to end
memory of what happened. Rather, her memory is fragmented, and the fragments
are not necessarily chronologically
in order in her memory, or in how she
related them. In that sense, the way that she related them was not so much by
free narrative,
as sometimes I see in child witness interviews, but rather in
response to questions that were asked of her by the interviewer in
witness interview, and then by the lawyers in court.
The reason [CLS's] memory is fragmented is not because it is invented, or a
hallucination, or the result of much later prescription
drug use. It is because
she was stoned and falling asleep at the time the memories were laid down. It
is impossible for me to conclude
how much is missing from [CLS's] memory. It
may be that the gaps are significant. What I must do is focus on the
credibility and
reliability of what [CLS] has related and says that she does
the trial judge's reasons addressed the question of darkness and nevertheless
accepted CLS's evidence that she specifically identified
the appellant's
his Honour specifically addressed and rejected the notion that CLS had
mistaken either of the accused for her father or anybody
the suggestion that CLS had some uncertainty about identification of SW relied
on a passage of evidence concerning offending conduct
by SW which was separate
to the offences committed by the appellant and SW together. The appellant drew
attention to the passage
from her evidence in which CLS had identified
going to my baby sister ... and at that point I finally woke up. Like, I'm able
to actually get up ... and I ran, like, all around
the house saying, like, 'Who
the fuck was in the room? Who was in the bed?' And it was him. He was the only
one awake ... at that
evidence addressed an incident which occurred later in the night after SW had
committed a separate offence against her. She
said that he raped her and that
he finished when he ejaculated. The full passage then
Q. Yeah. What happened after that?
A. Um, he left the room - - -
A. - - - and later on - night(?), so in the middle of the night, he tried to
come back in - - -
A. - - - and he thought - cos my baby sister was there too - - -
A. - - - so I saw him going to my baby sister - - -
A. - - - and at that point I finally woke up. Like, I'm able to actually get
Q. (Indistinct).
A. - - - and I ran, like, all around the house saying, like, 'Who the fuck was
in the room? Who was in the bed?' And it was him.
He was the only one awake - -
A. - - - at the point. I woke up my baby uncle, baby brother, cos my brother
was home at that point. I don't know where he was
before, but he finally was
back, and I told them.
A. And they didn't believe me. They just said, 'Nah, it couldn't be [SW],' but
my brother (indistinct) sort of believed me.
trial judge evidently thought the passage did not have the significance
attributed to it by the appellant. In his reasons, his
Honour rejected a
suggestion that CLS saying 'thinks' or 'believes' indicated
uncertainty.
He concluded that such language should be regarded only as her verbalising her
processing a traumatic event and even as an expression
of disbelief as to what
had happened. He went on to
In the same vein, [CLS] waking her younger cousins in the night and asking them
or saying to them words to the effect of whether
they had come into the room,
was confirmatory and an expression of anger. [CLS] knew who had come into the
room, knew it was [SW]
and not [her younger cousins].
the suggestion that CLS had reasoned towards the positive identification of the
appellant by a process of elimination was not specifically
addressed by the
trial judge but was in any event misplaced.
relied on this passage of evidence from
Q. So I know you said you could see, um, [the appellant's] face. So what's the
first thing that happened once you were in the bed
A. First thing was when [SW] came in.
Q. Mh hm. And what makes you think it was [SW]?
A. Um, cos I remember what he was wearing.
A. (Indistinct) I knew there was only, like, him and [the appellant] - only
ones that would do that. Like, my younger uncles are
dumb, but they're not like
passage was a comment made in the process of explaining why CLS had recognised
SW (not the appellant) as coming into the bedroom
as the first thing that
happened once she was in bed sleeping. It was not addressing the time when she
had said the appellant had
come into that room. It had nothing to do with the
recognition evidence which she gave both before and after that passage and in
which she had said when and how she had recognised the appellant.
the circumstances of the case to which reference has been made, the directions
which the trial judge did give himself, and
the fact that he had specifically
adverted to having considered the dangers of, or potential dangers of, CLS's
recognition evidence,
a more specific warning could not realistically have
affected the reasoning of the judge as to the verdicts of guilty. Indeed, the
probability of that outcome should properly be regarded as
leave to appeal should be granted, the appeal must be
certify that the preceding paragraph(s) comprise the reasons for decision of the
Supreme Court of Western Australia.
Research Associate to the
Honourable Justice Mazza
7 NOVEMBER 2025
ts 9 ‑ 10. SW was also convicted of committing other sexual
offences against CLS on the same day, but in addition to those
in which the
appellant had participated.
ts 443 ‑ 444.
ts 444. CLS had given evidence that although the room was darkened, it became
lighter when the door opened because there were lights
on in the house, and CLS
saw the appellant standing there, before he came into the room: ts
87 ‑ 88, 90.
Pre-recorded evidence of CLS, dated 7 March 2024, ts
Pre-recorded evidence of CLS, dated 7 March 2024, ts
Pre-recorded evidence of CLS, dated 7 March 2024, ts
Pre-recorded evidence of CLS, dated 7 March 2024, ts
Pre-recorded evidence of CLS, dated 7 March 2024, ts
RPS v The Queen
[2000] HCA 3
(2000) 199 CLR 620
[41] (Gaudron ACJ, Gummow,
Kirby & Hayne JJ).
Domican v The Queen
[1992] HCA 13
(1992) 173 CLR 555
, 561 ‑ 562
(Mason CJ, Deane, Dawson, Toohey, Gaudron &
McHugh JJ).
Mills v The State of
Western Australia
[2008] WASCA 219
189 A Crim R 411
(McLure JA).
ISN v The State of Western
Australia [No 2]
[2021] WASCA 112
[96] ‑ [97].
A Child v The State of
Western Australia
[2005] WASCA 91
153 A Crim R 406
[31] ‑ [41]
(McLure JA, Malcolm CJ agreeing), in which it was held that
s 19B(4)(c)
Children's Court of
Western Australia Act
operated to require the trial judge to apply a
provision equivalent to
Criminal Procedure Act
since-repealed s 651B of the
was referred to with approval in
AK v The State of Western
[2006] WASCA 245
[27] (Pullin JA,
Roberts‑Smith JA agreeing).
Fleming v The Queen
[1998] HCA 68
197 CLR 250.
Bropho v The State of
Western Australia
[31] ‑ [33].
(Buss JA, Roberts‑Smith JA
Brawn v The King
[2025] HCA 20
(2025) 99 ALJR 872
[10] (Gageler CJ, Gordon,
Edelman, Steward, Gleeson, Jagot & Beech‑Jones JJ).
MDP v The King
[2025] HCA 24
(2025) 99 ALJR 969
[3] (Gageler CJ),
[106] ‑ [107] (Gleeson, Jagot & Beech‑Jones JJ),
[33] (Gordon & Steward JJ), [44], [46] (Edelman
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (370 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter