URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WASAT/2025/125.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:06:54
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
NURSING AND MIDWIFERY BOARD OF AUSTRALIA and BASTIN [2025] WASAT 125 (5 November 2025)
STATE ADMINISTRATIVE
HEALTH PRACTITIONER REGULATION NATIONAL LAW (WESTERN
NURSING AND MIDWIFERY BOARD OF AUSTRALIA and BASTIN [2025]
DR M EVANS-BONNER, SENIOR MEMBER
MR R POVEY, MEMBER
DR B JONES, SESSIONAL MEMBER
DETERMINED ON THE DOCUMENTS
DELIVERED :
5 NOVEMBER 2025
FILE NO/S :
VR 30 of 2024
NURSING AND MIDWIFERY BOARD OF AUSTRALIA
MICHELLE JEANNE ROSEMARY BASTIN
Vocational regulation - Health practitioner -
Registered nurse - Disciplinary proceedings - Whether respondent practitioner
in professional misconduct - Practitioner found to have stolen from
clients in their home whilst a carer for their disabled children
referral can proceed in the Tribunal because criminal proceedings dismissed -
Respondent not registered at time of conduct
- Characterisation of the conduct -
Practitioner engaged in professional misconduct - Confidentiality order made to
protect identities
Legislation:
Criminal Code
Practitioner Regulation National Law (WA) Act 2010
(WA) (repealed),
s 6, s 193(1)(a)(i)
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
(Western Australia), s 3A(1), s 5, s 39, s 41, s 138, s 138(1)(c), s 138(2),
s 156, s 193(1)(a), s 194(1)(a), s 196, s 196(1)(a),
s 196(1)(b)(i), s
196(1)(b)(ii), s 207, s 244, s 244(d), s 244(f), Pt 8
Health Practitioner
Regulation National Law Act 2009
Health Practitioner Regulation
National Law Application Act 2024
(WA), s 5(1), s 5(2), s
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law Regulation
Australia), s 4
State Administrative Tribunal Act 2004
Practitioner found to have engaged in professional
Representation:
Solicitors:
Perth Legal Pty Ltd
Case(s) referred to in decision(s):
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
Health Care Complaints Commission v Black
[2014] NSWCATOD 35
Health Care Complaints Commission v Litchfield
[1997] 41 NSWLR 630
Health Care Complaints Commission v Scheggetman
[2023] NSWCATOD 48
Health Ombudsman v Roza
[2022] QCAT 420
Legal Profession Complaints Committee and Chang
[2019] WASAT 67
Medical Board of Australia and Woollard
[2012] WASAT 209
Medical Board of Australia v ZQX
[2024] QCAT 532
Nursing and Midwifery Board of Australia and Mehra [2022] VR 99
Nursing and Midwifery Board of Australia v BCD
[2024] QCAT 485
Nursing and Midwifery Board of Australia v Sotingco
[2018] VCAT 1615
Panegyres v Medical Board of Australia
[2020] WASCA 58
Veterinary Surgeons Board of Western Australia v Alexander
[2013] WASC 136
FOR DECISION OF THE TRIBUNAL
Introduction
Nursing and Midwifery Board of Australia (referred to as the
) alleges that, between 17 December 2018 and 22 October
2019, the Respondent, Ms Bastin, misappropriated (that is, stole) personal
and consumables from the home of Mr A and Mrs B whilst she was engaged as a
carer (through an organisation called 'At Home
Care') for their two
disabled children in their home.
Board alleges that this conduct breached the applicable Code of
and Code of
and amounts to
professional misconduct.
the reasons set out below, we are satisfied that the allegation is made out and
that Ms Bastin engaged in professional misconduct.
The referral
14 March 2024, the Australian Health Practitioner Regulation Agency
) referred the matter to this Tribunal in the name of the Board
under s 193(1)(a)(i) of the now repealed
Health Practitioner Regulation
National Law (WA) Act 2010
193(1)(a)(i) provided, in part, that a National Board must refer a matter about
a registered health practitioner to a
responsible tribunal if the Board
reasonably believes, based on a notification or for any other reason, the
practitioner has behaved
in a way that constitutes professional misconduct.
This Tribunal is a 'responsible
15 May 2024, the 2010 Act was repealed by the
Health Practitioner Regulation
National Law Application Act 2024
WA Application
WA Application Act further provided that the
Health Practitioner Regulation
National Law (Western Australia)
National Law
) applies as a law
of the State as if it were an
modified version of the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
out in the Schedule to the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law Act
new National Law operates as a continuation of the 2010 Act and so proceedings
commenced under the 2010 Act continue and must
be dealt with under the new
National Law as if they arose under the National
although these proceedings were commenced under the 2010 Act, they must be dealt
with under the National Law.
obligation to refer a matter to this Tribunal if a National Board believes a
registered health practitioner has behaved in a
way that constitutes
professional misconduct, is now contained in s 193(1)(a) of the National Law.
Board (that is, the Nursing and Midwifery Board of Australia) is the relevant
National Board for the nursing profession and is
therefore the correct applicant
in this matter.
The proceedings and issues for determination
4 February 2025, the President of the Tribunal, Justice Glancy, made orders that
various witness statements were, without admission
on the part of Ms Bastin, to
be received into evidence. These were:
(a) Statement of Ms C (the
adult daughter of Mr A and Mrs B), lodged on 27 September 2024
Photo and Video Statement of Ms C
(b) Statement of Ms C provided at Tab 6 of the Applicant's Bundle of
Documents lodged on 18 September 2024 (
Statement of Ms C
(c) Statement of Mr A provided at Tab 3 of the Applicant's Bundle of
Documents lodged on 18 September 2024 (
Statement of Mr A
(d) Statement of Mrs B provided at Tab 5 of the Applicant's Bundle of
Documents lodged on 18 September 2024 (
Statement of Mrs B
(e) Statement of Tony Edwardes provided at Tab 11 (commencing on page 130) of
the Applicant's Bundle of Documents lodged on 18 September
Statement of
Mr Edwardes
). Mr Edwardes is employed by At Home Care as a quality,
compliance and risk manager.
those orders, President Glancy also received the following materials into
(a) The Applicant's Bundle of Documents lodged on
18 September 2024 (
Applicant's Bundle
(b) The video recordings which are noted at Tab 8 of the Applicant's Bundle
of Documents and lodged separately with the Tribunal on
27 September 2024.
These were provided to the Board by
comprise three tabs:
(i) Tab 8.1 'Video recording of admissions A's house' (20 minutes 15
seconds long) (
Recording of Admissions Video
(ii) Tab 8.2 'Video Recording of Attendance at Practitioner's House Part 1'
(6 minutes and 13 seconds long) (
Attendance at Premises Video 1
(iii) Tab 8.3 'Video Recording of Attendance at Practitioner's House Part 2'
(10 minutes and 59 seconds long) (
Attendance at Premises Video 2
(c) Evidentiary Certificate of Kym Ayscough, Chief Executive Officer AHPRA,
dated 4 February 2025.
Glancy further ordered that, subject to any further order, Issues 1 to 5 of
the Applicant's Statement of
determined entirely on the documents pursuant to
State Administrative Tribunal Act 2004
issues are as follows:
: Can the Board refer a health
practitioner under s 193(1)(a) of the National Law to the Tribunal for the same
conduct that formed
the material facts of a criminal prosecution that was
discontinued by the prosecutor because the complainant withdrew the complaint?
: Whether the Respondent held registration under the National
enrolled nurse from 18 December 2015 to 31 May 2017?
registered nurse (Division 1) from 8 November 2019 to 28 January 2020, on which
date the Respondent's registration was suspended
by the Applicant as a form of
immediate action under s 156 of the National Law?
: Whether the Respondent worked as a carer to assist with looking after Mr
A and Mrs B's two children at their house between 17 December
2018 to 22 October
: Whether the Respondent misappropriated personal items and
consumables from Mr A and Mrs B between 17 December 2018 to 22 October
: Whether the Respondent's conduct found by the Tribunal
constitutes professional misconduct and/or unprofessional conduct and/or
unsatisfactory professional performance as defined in s 5 of the Schedule to the
National Law?
the case management process orders were made providing the parties with the
opportunity to file submissions and documents.
The Board filed several
submissions
we have had regard to.
Bastin generally did not engage with the opportunities given to her to file
responsive submissions. She did, however, file several
short submissions with
respect to issue
we deal with each issue in turn. However, before we do this, it is necessary to
outline the statutory regime.
The statutory regime
3A(1) of the National Law provides that the paramount consideration of the
National Law is the protection of the public
and the maintenance of public
confidence. It provides:
(1) The main guiding principle of the national registration and accreditation
scheme is that the following are paramount
(a) protection of the public;
(b) public confidence in the safety of services provided by registered health
practitioners and students.
196 of the National Law sets out the range of decisions that a responsible
tribunal, (that is, this Tribunal) can make after
hearing a matter about a
registered health practitioner.
Tribunal may decide that the practitioner has no case to answer, and no further
action is to be taken in relation to the
the other hand, the Tribunal may decide that, amongst other things, that the
practitioner has behaved in a way that constitutes
unsatisfactory professional
performance,
unprofessional
professional
misconduct.
terms are defined in s 5 of the National Law.
'Unsatisfactory
professional performance' is defined in s 5 of the National Law
unsatisfactory professional performance
, of a registered health
practitioner, means the knowledge, skill or judgment possessed, or care
exercised by, the practitioner in
the practice of the health profession in which
the practitioner is registered is below the standard reasonably expected of a
practitioner of an equivalent level of training
or experience;
'Unprofessional
conduct' is also defined in s 5 of the National Law:
unprofessional conduct
, of a registered health practitioner, means
professional conduct that is of a lesser standard than that which might
reasonably be
expected of the health practitioner by the public or the
practitioner's professional peers ...
definition continues to provide a list of examples of the type of conduct that
may constitute unprofessional conduct.
5 of the National Law also defines 'professional misconduct' to
professional misconduct
, of a registered health practitioner,
(a) unprofessional conduct by the practitioner that amounts to conduct that is
substantially below the standard reasonably expected
of a registered health
practitioner of an equivalent level of training or experience; and
(b) more than one instance of unprofessional conduct that, when considered
together, amounts to conduct that is substantially below
the standard reasonably
expected of a registered health practitioner of an equivalent level of training
or experience; and
(c) conduct of the practitioner, whether occurring in connection with the
practice of the health practitioner's profession or not,
that is inconsistent
with the practitioner being a fit and proper person to hold registration in the
profession;
definition of 'professional misconduct' in s 5 of the National Law is not
exhaustive. In
Vaughan JA (with whom Buss P and Murphy JA agreed)
It follows from the non-exhaustive nature of its definition that the concept of
professional misconduct is wider than that which
is provided for in pars (a) to
(c). 'Professional misconduct' under the National Law can include conduct which
does not fall within
any of pars (a), (b) or (c) in the definition; for example,
conduct which was infamous conduct in any professional respect in the
being conduct that would be reasonably regarded as disgraceful or dishonourable
by a practitioner's professional brethren
of good repute and competency would be
professional misconduct. It is, however, unnecessary to explore the limits of
the concept
of professional misconduct. In its referral the Board put the
allegation solely in terms of pars (a) and (b) of the s 5 definition.
reason it was not open to the Tribunal to find professional misconduct on any
wider basis; and the Tribunal did not purport
summary, conduct that would reasonably be regarded as disgraceful or
dishonourable by other members of the profession of good
repute and competency
would amount to professional misconduct.
Code of Conduct and Code of Ethics
39 of the National Law provides that:
A National Board may develop and approve codes and guidelines
(a) to provide guidance to the health practitioners it registers; and
(b) about other matters relevant to the exercise of its
Accordingly,
the Board developed the Code of Conduct, which amongst other things, sets out
professional behaviour and conduct expectations
for nurses in
1.2 of the Code of Conduct is titled, 'Lawful behaviour'. The relevant part of
principle 1.2 provides:
Nurses practise honestly and ethically and should not engage in unlawful
behaviour as it may affect their practice and/or damage
the reputation of the
profession. Nurses must
the nurse-person professional relationship by not taking possessions and/or
property that belong to the person and/or their
participate in unlawful behaviour and understand that unlawful behaviour may be
viewed as unprofessional conduct or professional
misconduct and have
implications for their registration, ...
Board has also adopted the Code of Ethics. The Code of Ethics is a values-based
document, whereas the Code of Conduct refers
to specific conduct.
Code of Ethics has principal elements that outline the standards of ethical
conduct for nurses. Element 1 of the Code concerns
'Nurses and people'.
The relevant part of Element 1
The nurse demonstrates professional values such as respectfulness,
responsiveness, compassion, trustworthiness and integrity.
Code of Ethics and the Code of Conduct are admissible as evidence of what
constitutes appropriate professional conduct in these
proceedings.
characterisation of the conduct.
The onus and standard of proof
Board has the onus of proving the allegations in their referral application to
the civil standard, being the balance of probabilities,
onus of proof in disciplinary matters was explained by the Tribunal in
as follows:
The Committee bears the onus of proof in relation to the allegations of
professional misconduct it makes against the practitioner.
The civil standard
of proof ('on a balance of probabilities') applies together with the
approach, which requires clear and cogent evidence to
be adduced by the Committee and for the Tribunal to feel an actual persuasion
the occurrence or existence of relevant facts before it can find the
practitioner guilty of professional misconduct (or unsatisfactory
professional
conduct). The
approach applies in disciplinary
proceedings, because of the nature and seriousness, and potential consequences,
of allegations of
wrongdoing (or incompetence) made in such proceedings. As
Dixon J said in
Briginshaw v
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
at 361 - 362:
Except upon
criminal issues to be proved by the prosecution, it is enough that the
affirmative of an allegation is made out to the
reasonable satisfaction of the
tribunal. But reasonable satisfaction is not a state of mind that is attained
or established independently
of the nature and consequence of the fact or facts
to be proved. The seriousness of an allegation made, the inherent
unlikelihood
of an occurrence of a given description, or the gravity of the
consequences flowing from a particular finding are considerations
affect the answer to the question whether the issue has been proved to the
reasonable satisfaction of the tribunal.
being satisfied of the truth of an allegation, we are mindful that we must
exercise caution and carefully scrutinise the evidence
upon which we base our
conclusions. That is particularly so given the serious consequences of a
disciplinary
when we express that we are satisfied, we do so because we feel an actual
persuasion of the occurrence of the event or the
existence of the fact on the
balance of probabilities, having regard to the
The evidence generally
Board relies upon the material received into evidence by President Glancy on 4
February 2025 in support of its case.
Bastin did not submit any evidence, and she has not sought to contradict or to
challenge any of the evidence relied upon by the
Board submits that we should accept the witness statements and supporting
documentary material admitted into evidence as truthful
and reliable accounts,
and that there are no surrounding facts or documents, nor any other indication
that the evidence is unable
to be accepted.
agree with this submission, as we will explain.
documentary evidence consists of contemporaneous records including the
notification and other contemporaneous correspondence
such as emails, letters,
file notes, as well as court documents and documents created by Western
Australia Police (
). There is nothing on the face of those
documents that suggests the contents should not be accepted as an accurate
record of events.
statements of Mr A, Mrs B and Ms C, are corroborated by the documentary evidence
and the video recordings. There are no inconsistencies
or contradictions in
those documents that indicate that they are not truthful or that they are
otherwise unreliable.
Furthermore,
as the Board points out, Ms Bastin has had the opportunity to file a response to
the Board's allegations and to file
evidence, but she has not done so, and has
not participated in the substantive proceedings, other than to be heard on issue
also observe that Ms Bastin was also given opportunities to respond to the
allegations during the immediate action and investigation
processes, and to
attend an interview, but she did not do so. Any responses would have been
part of the evidence before us in these
proceedings.
have referred to the evidence more specifically below when making our findings
on each issue.
turning to each issue, we will briefly outline the evidence concerning the
criminal prosecution and the AHPRA investigation.
This evidence is
contained in contemporaneous documents and is not in contention.
The criminal prosecution
29 October 2019, Mr A made a complaint to WAPOL that Ms Bastin had, over a
six-month period, stolen items of clothing, shoes,
cosmetics, toiletries and
food items, whilst working as a carer for his two disabled children in their
in a police incident
A estimated to police that Ms Bastin had stolen items of clothing and shoes
valued at approximately
Bastin was arrested on 17 January
offence of 'stealing as a servant' under s 378(7) of the
Criminal Code
8 February 2020, WAPOL signed a prosecution notice commencing a prosecution
against Ms Bastin for the offence of 'stealing as
a servant' pursuant to s
378(7) of the
Criminal Code
Criminal Proceedings
criminal trial was scheduled in the Magistrates' Court for 17 January
6 December 2021, Mr A withdrew the complaint. He stated that he no longer
wished police to proceed with the matter
I have too much stress going on with other matters. I just recently lost my son
and myself and my wife do not want the stress of
this matter while we are still
grieving. We also got most of the clothes back.
13 December 2021, WAPOL decided to discontinue the Criminal
Proceedings
were subsequently dismissed on 17 December
The AHPRA investigation
well as a complaint being made to police, a notification was also made to AHPRA
in November 2019 by an undisclosed person from
Bastin stealing from Mr A and Mrs B in their
28 January 2020, the Board took immediate action to suspend Ms Bastin's
registration as a Registered
under s 156
of the National
a letter dated 13 February 2020, AHPRA advised Ms Bastin that the Board had
decided to conduct an investigation in which they
Offence - Dishonesty Offence - Whether during the period you were providing care
for a household in your role with 'At Home Care'
you stole clothing which
resulted in you being charged by the WA Police with one count of stealing as a
30 March 2020, AHPRA wrote to Ms Bastin to advise her that they had placed their
investigation of her on hold until the Criminal
Proceedings were
Bastin emailed the investigators at AHPRA to notify them that the trial had been
vacated and 'all evidence against me has been
thrown out'. She claimed this was
'due to disclosure issues with the ... family's story and evidence handed in
against me'.
3 May 2022, AHPRA wrote to Ms Bastin to advise the Board would now be
investigating her
Notwithstanding
this, on 23 May 2022, Ms Bastin emailed AHPRA and stated that, 'I've sent the
nursing board all the information they
needed to reinstate my account with
AHPRA, due to the charges being dropped and the trial vacated by the Joondalup
Magistrates Court
AHPRA file note of a telephone call with Ms Bastin dated 24 May 2022, and
an email from the investigator to Ms Bastin on the same
date show that Ms Bastin
had not responded to the substantive allegation, and that Ms Bastin was of the
view that as the Criminal
Proceedings had been dismissed, that the AHPRA
investigation would no longer
an email dated 4 July 2022, Ms Bastin emailed AHPRA, stating that, 'I'm
informing you that your investigation into misconduct
is heading towards
defamation and I'll be requesting more time for legal advice, you can put
whatever information you feel you have
against me on hold until the
December 2022 and I'll inform you if a civil case
will be made against
14 October 2022, AHPRA emailed Ms Bastin stating that the investigation would
continue and noted that she had not made any responsive
submissions by a
deadline (3 May 2022) and an extended deadline (4 July 2022). Ms Bastin was
given further time, until 11 November
2022, in which to
17 January 2023, AHPRA wrote to Ms Bastin to advise the investigation was
continuing and that after a review of the restrictions
imposed by way of
immediate action, the restrictions were still necessary to protect public health
and safety.
30 May 2023, AHPRA wrote to Ms Bastin attaching a notice to attend an interview
investigator.
interview was scheduled for 8 June
28 September 2023, AHPRA wrote to Ms Bastin and stated that the investigation
was continuing. They advised that a review of the
restrictions imposed by
immediate action had taken place on 13 July 2023 and that it was
considered that the restrictions were still
necessary to protect the
14 December 2023, AHPRA advised Ms Bastin that the Board had decided to refer
the matter to the
Can the Board refer a health practitioner under s 193(1)(a) of the
National Law to the Tribunal for the same conduct that formed
the material facts of a criminal prosecution that was discontinued by the
prosecutor because the complainant withdrew the complaint?
we mentioned above, this issue is the only issue that Ms Bastin has sought to
respond to.
the reasons we set out below, the answer to this issue is 'yes'.
Conduct occurring outside of registration
addressing the substantive issue, we observe that at the time of the conduct, Ms
Bastin was not registered as a health practitioner
under the National Law. We
make findings about the dates of her registration below under issue 2.
138 of the National Law provides that proceedings may be taken against a person
who is a registered health practitioner in
relation to behaviour that occurred
during a period where the health practitioner was not
registered,
the conduct constitutes unsatisfactory professional performance or
unprofessional
the time of the referral to this Tribunal, and currently, Ms Bastin's
registration is suspended. Section 207 of the National
Law provides that if a
person's registration as a health practitioner is suspended, the person is taken
not to be registered, except
for the purpose of Pt 8 of the National Law. These
proceedings were commenced under Pt 8 of the National Law. Therefore, Ms Bastin
is still taken to be registered for the purposes of the National Law.
even though Ms Bastin's conduct occurred between two periods of registration,
the conduct could be referred to this Tribunal
under s 194(1)(a) of the National
Referral of conduct which formed the basis of the Criminal Proceedings
we will analyse Ms Bastin's submissions on the substantive part of this issue.
She has filed several written submissions which
are somewhat unclear.
one of those submissions Ms Bastin states the view that because the Criminal
Proceedings were discontinued, the evidence in those
proceedings was 'thrown
out' and that the Board could therefore not refer these proceedings to the
another submission Ms Bastin asks the Tribunal to dismiss the Board's referral
application, which appears to be based on a misunderstanding
of s 46(2) of
the SAT Act.
subsection provides that '[t]he Tribunal may make an order dismissing or
striking out all, or any part, of a proceeding before
it if the applicant
withdraws or agrees to the withdrawal of the proceeding or that part of it'. It
seems to us that Ms Bastin is
of the view that because the Criminal
Proceedings were dismissed, that these disciplinary proceedings should also be
However, s 46(2) provides that if an applicant withdraws a
proceeding they have commenced in this Tribunal, then the Tribunal can
an order dismissing or striking out the proceeding. That is, s 46(2) of the SAT
Act does not apply to a proceeding dismissed
in another jurisdiction.
Bastin's submission continues to state that AHPRA 'has archived an inactive
criminal case that was resolved over 4 years ago'
and that 'you shouldn't be
able to start a Civil matter in the State Administrative Tribunal'. She also
refers to the Applicant
being changed to the Board, and the allegation being
changed from stealing to misconduct. She indicated that the Board should have
gathered its own evidence instead of relying on a 'discontinued court case'.
She refers to the case being 'brought up a second
another submission, Ms Bastin states that the evidence was 'consented to be
thrown out' in the Magistrates Court and that 'Ahpra
was involved in the
criminal case and that is how they got evidence from the Police and handed it
over [to] the Nursing and Midwifery
Australia'.
the final submission Ms Bastin filed on this topic, she states that '[i]f anyone
wanted to start a civil matter against me then
they had to gather their own
evidence and couldn't use a discontinued criminal case'. She stated that 'there
is not much left on
file that acknowledges that I'm a thieve [sic], this puts a
Question Mark
on the applicates [sic] defence that I committed
professional misconduct'. She continued to state that the Board's legal
representatives
'went against court orders ... and kept a criminal investigation
on file from 17 December 2020 until currently, the applicate [sic]
accused of illegally archiving a discontinued court case for financial gain and
gave false and misleading information to
the State Administrative Tribunal
the Board's submissions, it summarised the above submissions from Ms Bastin as
the Practitioner's position is that the Tribunal should dismiss the Referral
Application because:
58.1 the Board was a party to the
Criminal Proceedings.
58.2 the Criminal Proceedings were dismissed.
58.3 by dismissing the Criminal Proceedings, the Board, as a party to the
Criminal Proceedings, agreed not to take any further action
in relation to the
conduct underlying the Criminal Proceedings.
58.4 the Board now relies on the underlying conduct of the Criminal
Proceedings in this Referral Application in breach of its agreement
to not take
any further action in relation to the conduct underlying the Criminal
Proceedings.
58.5 as the Board has breached its agreement the Tribunal should dismiss
these proceedings.
submission also reflects our understanding of Ms Bastin's submissions which we
outlined above.
would also add, that underlying her submissions is the assertion that evidence
from Criminal Proceedings that have been discontinued
or dismissed cannot be
used in evidence in these disciplinary proceedings, and that new evidence would
need to be obtained by the
Board for the purposes of the disciplinary
proceedings.
observe that, contrary to Ms Bastin's submissions, the criminal prosecution was
commenced by WAPOL and the Board was not a party
to the Criminal Proceedings.
did the Board make any representation that they would not take further action
after the Criminal Proceedings were dismissed.
In fact, the correspondence from
the Board to Ms Bastin (which we outlined above) makes it clear that the Board
put their disciplinary
investigation on hold until the Criminal Proceedings were
determined. The decision to discontinue the prosecution was made by
and did not
have anything to do with the Board.
the Civil and Administrative Tribunal of New South Wales considered an
application from the respondent health practitioner to permanently
dismiss disciplinary proceedings in the Tribunal. The practitioner argued,
amongst other things, that the Tribunal could
not proceed to hear the complaints
against him by virtue of the doctrines of issue estoppel, res judicata and/or
autrefois acquit
(generally, the
Estoppel Submissions
) as he had been
acquitted of criminal charges.
, the practitioner also submitted that the regulator was a
party to the criminal proceedings because the regulator had written to
indicating it was continuing with an investigation before a criminal trial was
commenced. However, the Tribunal observed that,
'[t]his does not, in any sense,
join the HCCC as a party to the criminal
proceedings'.
That observation applies in Ms Bastin's case.
Tribunal also rejected the Estoppel Submissions and observed that vocational
disciplinary proceedings are different to criminal
proceedings. In this regard,
the Tribunal cited the following passage from the New South Wales Court of
Appeal decision in
Even if, in this case, the parties in both proceedings are the same there is
still no res judicata estoppel. These are civil proceedings
in which the civil
onus applies as explained in Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
See Bannister v Walton
(1993) 30 NSWLR 699.
Even if the factual
questions were identical, the difference in the onus of proof prevents the
issues being the same. Whether particular
conduct has been established beyond
reasonable doubt is not the same question as whether that conduct has been
established on the
balance of probabilities. Thus an acquittal does not bar
civil proceedings against the accused arising out of the same facts. See
generally Helton v Allen
[1940] HCA 20
(1940) 63 CLR 691
, Rejfek v McElroy
[1965] HCA 46
(1965) 112 CLR 517.
The proposition that an acquittal does not inhibit disciplinary proceedings
arising out of the same facts is well established in
other common law
(1911) 22 Ont LR 627
; Re A Medical Practitioner
(1959) NZLR 784 (CA)
; Bodna v Deller
[1981] VicRp 20
[1981] VR 183
Basser v Medical Board
[1981] VicRp 88
[1981] VR 953
at 971-2; and Saeed v
Inner London Education Authority
[1985] ICR 637.
It is also sound in principle
because both the onus of proof and the purpose and focus of the proceedings are
respectfully agree with, and adopt, these observations.
Criminal Proceedings differ from vocational disciplinary proceedings in
Tribunal. The onus of proof is different, and so is the purpose of those
proceedings, with disciplinary proceedings having the
protection of the public
as their primary focus. Furthermore, there is no estoppel or other legal
restriction that applies to prevent
us from considering the evidence that was
before the Magistrates' Court in the Criminal Proceedings.
, the Tribunal further observed that despite there being a
'high degree of overlap' between the criminal charges and the circumstances
the complaint before the
... it is well settled that the mere fact that proceedings in other courts or
tribunals (i.e. other than protective proceedings in
this jurisdiction) arose
out of the same facts and circumstances does not provide a basis for a permanent
stay or a dismissal.
Indeed, it may be quite wrong for the Tribunal not to proceed on these aspects
of the Complaints where there may be a significant
public interest in
considering them. In the context of an application for admission to a profession
in the matter of Jackson (formerly
Subramaniam) v Legal Practitioners Admission
[2007] NSWCA 289
the Court of Appeal clearly stated that the principles
apply equally to disciplinary proceedings. At paragraph 34 Giles JA
of the different burdens of proof, an acquittal does not bar civil proceedings
arising out of the same facts. For the same
reason and because of the different
"purpose and focus of the proceedings", an acquittal does not inhibit
disciplinary proceedings
arising out of the same facts: Health Care Complaints
Commission v Litchfield
[1997] NSWSC 297
; (1997) 41 NSWLR 630 at 635-6. No res
judicata, issue estoppel, doctrine of autrefois acquit or other rule of law
prevents examination
of the conduct relied on for the crime: Prothonotary of the
Supreme Court of New South Wales v Castillo
[2001] NSWCA 75
. The facts
can be investigated and determined adversely to the defendant or the person
subject to the disciplinary proceedings, and
the court or tribunal is not
confined to the evidence in the criminal proceedings, let alone to an
examination of the "findings"
- a difficult task in the case of a jury's
Pritchard J, made the following observations about the different purposes of
criminal and disciplinary
proceedings:
... even if the rule against double jeopardy, or principles concerning the
prevention of an abuse of process, have a role to play
in disciplinary
proceedings, the purposes of criminal and disciplinary proceedings are
different, so that the application of the
restrictive approach to the
construction of appeal provisions which is applied in the criminal context is
not warranted in respect
of appeals in disciplinary matters. The object of
criminal proceedings includes the punishment of those who disobey the law. It
involves proceedings brought by the State, with its considerable resources,
against an accused. In contrast, the object of disciplinary
proceedings is,
generally speaking, to protect the public by maintaining standards of behaviour
of persons permitted to work or carry
on business in a particular industry or
profession. As is the case here, disciplinary proceedings are frequently
brought by vocational
regulatory bodies. In those circumstances, some of the
concerns which underlie the rule against double jeopardy in the criminal
do not apply, or do not apply with the same force, in the disciplinary context.
This is apparent from the fact that it is
well established that an acquittal in
respect of a criminal charge arising from particular conduct does not preclude
disciplinary
proceedings being commenced in respect of the same
even if criminal proceedings and vocational disciplinary proceedings arise from
the same facts and circumstances, as is the
case in these proceedings concerning
Ms Bastin, there is no bar to a Tribunal hearing and determining disciplinary
proceedings when
there have been prior criminal proceedings, even if the person
was acquitted or if the criminal charges did not proceed or were dismissed.
of the SAT Act also support a conclusion that the Tribunal can consider evidence
from the Criminal Proceedings. The SAT
Act provides that the Tribunal is
not bound by the rules of evidence, although the Tribunal may have regard to
Relevantly,
the Tribunal is also to act according to equity, good conscience and the
substantial merits of the case without regard
to technicalities and legal
Tribunal may also inform itself on any matter as it sees
Tribunal did not inform itself by having regard to the materials from the
Criminal Proceedings, it would be failing to consider
material that was relevant
to the substantial merits of the case. The Tribunal would also be failing
to fulfil a statutory obligation
to ensure that all relevant material is
disclosed to the Tribunal to enable it to determine the relevant facts in
summary, for the reasons we have explained above, we are satisfied, and we find,
that this Tribunal can consider evidence from
the Criminal Proceedings.
s 193(1)(a) of the National Law mandates that a National Board must refer a
matter about a registered health practitioner
to a responsible tribunal if the
Board reasonably believes that the practitioner has behaved in a way that
constitutes professional
misconduct. That reasonable belief can be based
on a notification or for any other reason.
are satisfied, and find, that there was sufficient basis for the Board to have
formed such a reasonable belief and accordingly,
the Board was mandated to make
the referral application to this Tribunal, despite the conduct being the same as
the conduct that
was the subject of the Criminal Proceedings.
therefore reject Ms Bastin's submission that these proceedings should be
Whether the Respondent held registration under the National Law as:
enrolled nurse from 18 December 2015 to 31 May 2017?
b. a registered nurse
(Division 1) from 8 November 2019 to 28 January 2020, on which date the
Respondent's registration was suspended
by the Applicant as a form of immediate
action under s 156 of the National Law?
evidentiary certificate signed by the Chief Executive Officer of AHPRA, Kym
Ayscough dated 4 February 2025, states that:
(a) Ms Bastin was
registered as an Enrolled Nurse from 18 December 2015 to 31 May 2017;
(b) Ms Bastin has been registered as a Registered Nurse since 8 November
(c) her registration was suspended by the Board on 28 January 2020 under s
156 of the National
evidentiary certificate is expressed to be made pursuant to s 244 of the
National Law. Section 244 provides that such a certificate
is prima facie
evidence of certain specified matters, including as to when a practitioner was a
registered health
practitioner,
when their registration was suspended or
therefore satisfied, and find, that the evidentiary certificate is prima facie
evidence of the dates that Ms Bastin was registered,
and also of the date her
registration was suspended.
on this evidence, we are satisfied, and we find, that the answer to questions
(a) and (b) in this issue are 'yes'.
Whether the Respondent worked as a carer to assist with looking after Mr A
and Mrs B's two children at their house between 17 December
2018 to 22 October
on the evidence we outline below, the answer to this question is also
employment agreement signed by Ms Bastin on 25 July 2018 and by At Home Care on
26 July 2018 shows that Ms Bastin was employed
by At Home Care as a 'Home Care
employee' with a start date of 24 July
Statement of Mr Edwardes also provides details of Ms Bastin's employment with At
Mrs B. Mr Edwardes states that
as part of his role as quality, compliance and risk manager, he is able to
produce records relating
employment.
Edwardes states that Ms Bastin was employed as a Home Care Worker from 24 July
2018 until 24 October
on this evidence we are satisfied, and we find, that Ms Bastin was employed as a
carer by At Home Care from 24 July 2018 until
24 October 2019.
also note payslips from At Home Care which show that Ms Bastin was employed
as a Home Care Employee during the pay period commencing
24 June 2019 to the pay
period ending
27 October 2019.
Based on the above evidence, those payslips appear to only relate to part of the
period that Ms Bastin was employed by At Home Care.
respect to when Ms Bastin worked as a carer for Mr A and Mrs B's two
disabled children in their home, Mr Edwardes stated that
from 5 December
2018 until 22 October 2019 Ms Bastin worked with Mr A and Mrs B's family where
she provided support to them and their
two children at their home
Edwardes stated that Ms Bastin's duties as a carer were to provide personal,
domestic and social support to the family and to
assist with their personal
their respective statements, Mr A and Mrs B say that they hired Ms Bastin
through At Home Care to help look after their two disabled
children. Both say
that she was employed in that role three days a
C, who is the daughter of Mr A and Mrs B, stated that in August 2018, her
parents employed Ms Bastin, through At Home Care, as
a carer to look after her
parents' two handicapped children in their
their statements, Mr A, Mrs B and Ms C describe confronting Ms Bastin about
her stealing items from Mr A and Mrs B's home (which
were primarily items of
clothing and shoes belonging to Mrs B) on 22 October
describes attending Ms Bastin's house on 22 October 2019, on Ms Bastin's
invitation, to look for the
summary, all the statements before us state that Ms Bastin was employed to look
after Mr A and Mrs B's two disabled children in
their home. We are satisfied of
this and so find.
respect to when Ms Bastin started working as a carer for Mr A and Mrs B's
disabled children, Mr A, Mrs B and Ms C say that Ms
Bastin commenced
working in the family home as a carer for the children in August 2018. However,
Mr Edwardes states that she commenced
working in this capacity from 5 December
are of the view that Mr Edwardes' evidence as to when Ms Bastin started
working in the family's home is likely to be more accurate.
He stated that in
his role he was able to produce records relating to staff employment and we
infer that he would have accessed
those records when preparing his statement.
In addition, an email dated 30 December 2019 from At Home Care in response to
questions from AHPRA, stated that Ms Bastin had worked in the house as a
support worker from 17 December
infer that this information was likely obtained from the employment records of
At Home Care and is therefore likely to
be more accurate than the family's
recollection. We therefore find, and are satisfied, that Ms Bastin was
employed as a carer for
Mr A and Mrs B's two disabled children in their home
from sometime in December, either from 5 December 2018 or
17 December 2018.
In any event, she was certainly working for the
family in their home from 17 December 2018.
date Ms Bastin finished working in Mr A and Mrs B's home is clearer. The family
retrieved the items of clothing from Ms Bastin's
house after confronting her
Ms Bastin worked for the family
until 22 October 2019. Based on that
evidence, we are satisfied, and we find, that Ms Bastin was working for the
family until 22
October 2019.
summary, the answer to this question is 'yes'. That is, we find that
Ms Bastin worked as a carer in Mr A and Mrs B's home to assist
after their two disabled children from 17 December 2018 until 22 October
Whether the Respondent misappropriated personal items and consumables from Mr A
and Mrs B between 17 December 2018 to 22 October
Bastin did not respond to this allegation during the investigation by police,
AHPRA and in these proceedings. She did not file
any evidence or make any
submissions on this issue.
Board has suggested that it is open to us to draw an adverse inference from the
practitioner's silence at the hearing, citing
various New South Wales
authorities in support of that submission.
are of the view that we do not need to draw such an inference because there is
sufficient evidence before us whereby, we are satisfied
that this allegation is
evidence before us includes the Statement of Mrs B, the Statement of Mr A, the
Statement of Ms C and the Photo and Video Statement
of Ms C. Those statements
are supported by photographs and video footage. Ms Bastin also made a partial
admission to At Home Care
which was recorded in a contemporaneous
is, however, difficult for us to precisely identify the date that the conduct
most likely commenced. It certainly occurred over
a period of time. We discuss
this below.
Statement of Mrs B
the Statement of Mrs B, she attests to being 70 years of age. Mrs B stated
that sometimes she and her husband would go out and
leave Ms Bastin to look
after the children. She described Ms Bastin as having 'free reign' of the house
when she was working there.
Mrs B stated that she trusted Ms Bastin to look
after the house and the children when she and her husband went out.
B stated that about 10 months after Ms Bastin had commenced working for her, she
noticed Ms Bastin was wearing a red blouse with
flowers on it. Mrs B said she
knew it was her blouse because she had it specially made in Melbourne. She
asked Ms Bastin where
she got the blouse from. Ms Bastin said that she got it
from (a clothing store called) 'Millers'.
B stated that she noticed Ms Bastin was wearing other 'tops' which Mrs B thought
belonged to her. She started looking through
her clothing and found items
missing from her wardrobe. She noticed she was missing a black jacket and
several pairs of shoes.
Mrs B also realised she was missing a lot of clothing
from the wardrobe in her daughter's bedroom.
Mrs B noticed that toiletries, groceries, laundry products and food were
missing. She stated that every time Ms Bastin
was working something else went
B stated that her husband installed some cameras to find out what was happening.
She said that within a week they had photographs
of Ms Bastin taking items
from the house and trying on a pair of slacks belonging to Mrs B.
B said that after about four weeks her husband confronted Ms Bastin about
the stealing, and that Ms Bastin admitted she had been
stealing from them. She
stated that her husband recorded the conversation.
to Mrs B, on 22 October 2019, Ms Bastin invited her to her house to collect the
clothing she had stolen. Mrs B said that
she found a large amount of her
clothing hanging up in Ms Bastin's wardrobe which she collected and took home.
She stated that she
collected 33 items of her clothing from Ms Bastin's
B said that Ms Bastin said she had sold the shoes she had stolen from Mrs B, and
also some of Mrs B's clothing, on eBay.
B stated that her two grandsons recorded Mrs B finding the clothing at Ms
Bastin's house, and Ms Bastin admitting to the stealing.
estimated the value of clothing recovered was valued at about $1,800.
Statement of Mr A
A's statement is similar to his wife's statement.
stated that he was 69 years of age.
A said that about 10 months after Ms Bastin commenced working in his home, he
suspected her of stealing. He thought this because
he saw Ms Bastin wearing his
wife's blue sleeveless top while she was at their house. He said he confronted
Ms Bastin about this,
but she denied that it belonged to Mrs B. Mr A further
said that shortly after, he noticed that several pairs of his wife's shoes
gone missing.
said that he and Mrs B started keeping an eye out for things going missing. He
stated that they started noticing numerous items
going missing such as
cosmetics, toiletries and food items.
A said that he decided to obtain proof of the stealing and took photos of Ms
Bastin stealing. He confronted Ms Bastin and showed
her the photos. Ms Bastin
admitted to stealing the items and selling some of them on eBay.
A said that he provided a list of the stolen items to police which were valued
B said that on 22 October 2019, Ms Bastin invited Mrs B and their daughter to
her house to look for the stolen items. He stated
that while they were at Ms
Bastin's house his wife found 33 items belonging to her and took them
B said that he contacted At Home Care and reported Ms Bastin, and that he also
made a report to
have also viewed photographs taken by Mr A. These show Ms Bastin holding
up two tops on hangers and trying on a black
Statements of Ms C
are two statements from Ms C. These are the Statement of Ms C and the Photo and
Video Statement of Ms C. We will discuss
the statements in this order.
C stated that she was 49 years of age and is the daughter of Mr A and Mrs
said that in October 2019, her father had installed cameras in his house because
Mr A and Mrs B thought that Ms Bastin was stealing
clothing and food items. Ms
C said that her father told her he had caught Ms Bastin trying on Mrs B's
clothing on video footage.
C stated that on 22 October 2019 she went to her parents' house because they had
decided to confront Ms Bastin about the stealing.
She stated that her two
sons were also present.
C said that she, Ms Bastin, Mr A and Mrs B sat at the dining table, and that Mr
A showed video footage to Ms Bastin and asked
her about the clothes. Ms C
stated that Ms Bastin confirmed she had taken clothing from the house which
belonged to Mrs B. Ms Bastin
said that she had sold a lot of the clothing and
all the shoes on eBay. Ms C said she did not know what Ms Bastin's eBay
C stated that Ms Bastin asked how much money her parents wanted for the
clothing. Ms Bastin said that she would go to the bank
and get the money. Ms C
stated that her parents did not accept the offer.
Bastin stated that she still had a lot of clothes at her house and offered that
Mrs B could come and collect them. Ms C said
that she told Ms Bastin that
she and her two sons would come with Mrs B to collect the items of
that day, Ms C went to Ms Bastin's home with her two sons and Mrs B. Ms Bastin
opened two cupboards which were full of clothing
and said Mrs B could look
through them to find what was hers. Ms C observed that it seemed like Ms Bastin
did not know what belonged
to her and what belonged to Mrs B.
C said that her mother picked up about 80 items of clothing. She stated that Ms
Bastin also brought a load of washing from a
dryer which was still warm and let
Mrs B look through it to see if any of the clothing belonged to her. Ms C
stated that Ms Bastin
said that she normally washes the clothing before selling
it. Ms C said that her two sons filmed everything on their iPad, and that
she later provided the footage to police.
addition, Ms C also stated that prior to leaving the house, Ms Bastin
thanked them like they had done her a favour. They then
drove back to Mrs B's
house where they laid out all the recovered clothing on a table and took
photographs of it. Ms C later provided
these photographs to police.
the Photo and Video Statement of Ms C she attached the photographs she took of
the items of clothing laid out on Mr A and Mrs
B's dining table.
have reviewed the photographs taken by Ms C. By our estimation, Mrs B's
estimation that there were 33 items of clothing is likely
to be correct
from what we can see laid out on the table in these photographs. It is
difficult to estimate the exact amount because
there is a substantial amount of
clothing piled up on the
the Photo and Video Statement of Ms C she confirmed that she had extracted the
video footage (that her two sons filmed on their
iPad at Ms Bastin's house)
and provided it to
Other contemporaneous documents
file note dated 24 October 2019 from At Home Care records that the writer
telephoned Ms Bastin on 23 October 2019 to discuss the
allegations that she had
been stealing from Mr A and Mrs B in their home. That file note shows that Ms
Bastin made partial admissions.
The file note
... I asked her to elaborate on the incident and she relayed the
- [Mrs B] had been sorting clothes that she no longer wanted
- [Mrs B] gave Michelle some clothes
- Michelle stole other clothes from [Mrs B] without her knowledge
- [Mr A] approached her about this
- Michelle agreed to the family following her home to retrieve the stolen items
further AHPRA file note of a telephone call with the notifier from At Home
Care, dated 31 December 2019, records that the Human
Resources Manager from At
Ms Bastin had stated that
she was not able to come in and wanted to consult a
lawyer. It records that she did not attend the scheduled
email dated 30 December 2019 from At Home Care in response to further questions
from AHPRA, stated that Ms Bastin 'admitted to
me that she stole from the
Video recordings
are three videos: Recording of Admissions Video; Attendance at Premises Video 1;
and Attendance at Premises Video 2.
the Recording of Admissions Video, Mr A, Ms C and Ms Bastin are sitting at a
dining table and Mrs B is standing. Mr A confronts
Ms Bastin with video
footage of her trying on a jacket and looking at the sizes of clothes. He
confronts her with stealing food
(including tomatoes and boxes of orange juice)
and to wearing Mrs B's tops when she is in their home. Ms Bastin admits to
the orange juice and eating biscuits.
Bastin admits to taking 'one or two tops' and wearing them to the house while
she was working; to stealing items of food and drink
whilst working for the
family; and to stealing $1,000 worth of clothes. Ms Bastin offers to
return the items and to also pay money
to the family on top of that. It appears
to us that this offer is made in response to demands from Mr A that 'if you
don't bring
the stuff back, I'll ring the police', and that if she returns the
items, 'we'll see what we can do'. An arrangement is made at
the video that Mrs B and Ms C will go to Ms Bastin's house with her to retrieve
the stolen items.
Attendance at Premises Video 1 shows Ms Bastin, Mrs B and Ms C and one of
Ms C's sons walk up to and enter Ms Bastin's home.
They are filmed walking
through the house into a bedroom. Mrs B goes through a wardrobe opened by Ms
Bastin and searches for items
of clothing belonging to her. Ms C assists her.
Mrs B identifies numerous items of clothing as belonging to her, takes them off
hangers and puts them on the bed. Ms Bastin is filmed taking clothing out of a
dryer or washing machine in the laundry. Ms Bastin
identifies three tops as
belonging to Mrs B, saying 'I think this one's yours'; 'I think this one is';
and 'this one', as she removes
the tops from hangers in the wardrobe and hands
them to Mrs B.
the Attendance at Premises Video 2, Mrs B and Ms C continue looking for clothes
in the wardrobe and identifying clothes belonging
to Mrs B. Mrs B is going
through the wardrobe and pulling out clothes which she hands to Ms C who removes
the hangers and puts them
on the bed. Three items of clothing are identified as
belonging to a female named S, who we infer was a relative or friend of Mrs
B asks Ms Bastin if she has any of her clothes that still had tags attached, to
which Ms Bastin replied, 'If I did, I probably
pulled them off'. By the end of
the video there is a large pile of clothes on the bed. Mrs B commented, 'It's a
lot, isn't it?'.
One of the boys says, 'it's so much'. Ms C asked, 'what's
going to happen with the ones that have been sold?' Ms Bastin states
A and Mrs B tell her what the price is she will arrange to pay them. Ms Bastin
asks, 'are you happy with that arrangement',
to which Mrs B says 'yes' and that
'the only thing missing is my shoes'. The family packed the clothing into two
large bags. As
the family are leaving Ms Bastin thanked them for coming. She
can be heard saying to text her what the difference is, which we infer
reference to Mr A and Mrs B telling her how much money she owed them.
Findings of fact
we indicated earlier in these reasons, we are satisfied that the evidence of Mr
A, Mrs B and Ms C is truthful and reliable. It
is also corroborated by the
video and photographic evidence, and by Ms Bastin's partial admission to At
some items from the family.
on the evidence we have just outlined; we make the following findings of fact
that are relevant to this issue.
working as a carer in Mr A and Mrs B's home for their two disabled children, Ms
Bastin was often left unattended in the house.
working for Mr A and Mrs B in their home, Ms Bastin stole multiple items of
clothing. The clothing primarily belonged to
Mrs B. There were at least 33
items of clothing stolen from Mr A and Mrs B's home by Ms Bastin. Some of the
clothing was new with
tags on it. Ms Bastin stole more than one pair of
shoes from Mrs B.
Bastin wore items of clothing she had stolen from Mrs B on at least two separate
occasions when working for the family in their
her wearing a blue sleeveless top which belonged to his wife. Mrs B also saw Ms
Bastin wear a red
blouse with flowers on it which belonged to Mrs B that she had
made in Melbourne.
Bastin also stole toiletries, groceries, food items and laundry products from
the family whilst working for them in their home.
On a weekly basis, Mr A and
Mrs B started to notice items going missing.
Bastin was not given permission by Mr A or Mrs B to borrow or to take any of the
items. As such, we reject the explanation Ms
Bastin gave to At Home Care that
Mrs B was sorting clothes she no longer wanted and gave some to Ms Bastin. We
are satisfied, and
we find, that Ms Bastin knew she was stealing items from
the family that she was not entitled to.
Ms Bastin was confronted and shown photographs of herself looking at the sizes
of clothes and trying on clothes in the family
stealing food items, clothing and shoes. She also admitted that some of the
clothing items belonged
to Mrs B when Mrs B was sorting through the wardrobe and
pulling out items from the wardrobe at Ms Bastin's home.
threat of being reported to the police, Ms Bastin offered to return the clothes
and to also pay money to Mr A and Mrs B. She
offered that Mrs B could attend
her house to locate any of her clothing Ms Bastin was in possession of.
B found approximately 33 items of her clothing, including three items of
clothing belonging to another female, identified as
'S', which were stolen from
the family's home, hanging in a wardrobe at Ms Bastin's home.
Bastin sold more than one pair of shoes she had stolen from Mrs B on eBay.
She also sold some of Mrs B's clothing on eBay. She
admitted this to the
family on 22 October 2019.
value of the clothing stolen by Ms Bastin was approximately $1,800.
A made the complaint to police.
Ms Bastin commenced stealing the items from the family's home whilst working for
them is less clear to us.
assessing the likely timeframe in which the stealing occurred, we are assisted
by the following facts:
(a) Ms Bastin worked for the family three
days a week from 17 December 2018 to 22 October 2019. The family did not
suspect the stealing
straight away. Mr A, for example, said it was about 10
months after Ms Bastin commenced caring for their children in their home
became suspicious that she was stealing from them. This suggests the stealing
is likely to have commenced some months after
Ms Bastin started working for
the family.
(b) A large volume of clothing was stolen, comprising approximately 33 items,
plus shoes, food items, toiletries and laundry items.
It is likely that Ms
Bastin would have removed the items from the home gradually to avoid the family
(c) The evidence of Mr A and Mrs B also suggests the items went missing over
time. For example, Mrs B said that each week items went
missing. Ms Bastin
wore items of clothing to the house on at least two occasions which made the
family suspicious, resulting in
Mr A setting up cameras.
(d) Some of Mrs B's clothes and shoes had been sold on eBay by the time Mrs B
attended Ms Bastin's house to collect them on 22 October
2019. This also
suggests items were being sold on eBay over a period of time, which in turn
lends support to a finding that the
stealing occurred over a period of
Our conclusion on issue 4
are satisfied, and we find, that Ms Bastin was stealing items whilst working as
a carer at Mr A and Mrs B's house over a period
of several months from
approximately July 2019 to 22 October 2019.
answer to the question posed in this issue, we are satisfied, and we find, that
Ms Bastin misappropriated personal items and consumables
from Mr A and Mrs B
from approximately July 2019 to 22 October 2019.
Whether the Respondent's conduct found by the Tribunal constitutes professional
misconduct and/or unprofessional conduct and/or unsatisfactory
professional
performance as defined in s 5 of the Schedule to the National Law?
Bastin's conduct, that is, stealing clothing, shoes, food, toiletries and
laundry items from Mr A and Mrs B's home whilst caring
for their two disabled
children, unequivocally amounts to professional misconduct.
gravity of Ms Bastin's conduct is evident from the fundamental and serious
nature of it.
Bastin has breached Principle 1.2 of the Code of Conduct which requires nurses
to practise honestly and ethically and not to engage
in unlawful behaviour. The
Code of Conduct expressly states that nurses must not take possessions or
property from person's (they
are caring for) or their families.
Bastin also breached Element 1 of the Code of Ethics which requires nurses,
amongst other things, to behave with trustworthiness
and integrity.
multiple items from Mr A and Mrs B in their home over a period of months whilst
occupying the trusted position of carer
for the couple's two disabled children,
is a clear and obvious breach of these fundamental obligations in the Code of
Conduct and
the Code of Ethics.
are other factors in this case which lend further support to a finding that the
conduct was serious misconduct that amounts
to professional misconduct.
the conduct occurred in Mr A and Mrs B's home, in circumstances where they
trusted Ms Bastin to look after their two disabled
children. Indeed, in her
statement, Mrs B expressly stated that she trusted Ms Bastin to look after the
house and the children when
she and her husband were not there. Patients and
their families are entitled to feel safe and secure in their own homes and
personal items and belongings is a gross violation of trust and an
interference with the safety and security that these persons are
entitled to
feel in their homes.
Mr A and Mrs B are vulnerable persons. At the time Ms Bastin was stealing
from them, they were 69 and 70 years of age
respectively. Mr A was unemployed,
and Mrs B a housewife. Mr A and Mrs B are the parents of two disabled children
who live with
them. They had engaged Ms Bastin to help them care for the
Ms Bastin's conduct was not opportunistic. It occurred over a period of months
and, in our view, involved a level of forethought
and planning. There is, for
example, photographic evidence of Ms Bastin holding up clothing on hangers to
examine it, and trying
on some of the clothing for size, including pants and a
jacket. This shows a consideration of the items she was taking. Ms Bastin
would have had to surreptitiously remove the items of clothing from the home in
such a manner to prevent Mr A and Mrs B from noticing
their removal.
Ms Bastin washed some of the clothing and sold it on eBay. As such, we are
also satisfied that she was motivated
by financial and personal gain.
we are satisfied that Ms Bastin has not shown any remorse or insight. She has
not apologised to Mr A and Mrs B. She has
not sought to reimburse them. She
attempted to minimise her behaviour when she was telephoned by At Home Care by
saying that Mrs
B gave her some of the clothes. She did not cooperate with
AHPRA and accused them of defamation. She did not participate in the
processes, other than to seek that the evidence in the Criminal Proceedings
could not be used in these Tribunal proceedings.
Her submissions and statements
on this issue seek to mitigate the seriousness of that evidence. For example,
as we discussed above
in the section on '[t]he AHPRA investigation',
Ms Bastin told AHPRA that the evidence in the Criminal Proceedings was
'thrown out'
by the Court 'due to disclosure issues with the ... family's story
...'. In our view, this also shows that she has not taken responsibility
her conduct and lacks insight into it.
the conduct in each proceeding needs to be assessed in accordance with the facts
and circumstances of each individual case,
there are numerous decisions of
responsible Tribunals in which health practitioners who have stolen from their
patients and the family
members of patients have been found to have committed
professional misconduct. In all the cases cited, the practitioner had been
convicted of stealing or other dishonesty offences by a Court. The absence of a
criminal conviction in Ms Bastin's case does not
change the nature of the
conduct, which we are satisfied occurred on the balance of probabilities and to
a Western Australian case decided by consent, the nurse took a debit card from a
patient's private room at the hospital where she
worked and used it to make 10
fraudulent transactions to the value of approximately $433.03. The nurse was
found to have engaged
in professional misconduct.
a nurse stole credit card information from an elderly patient who was a resident
in a nursing home where she worked. She used the
credit card details to make
online purchases of cologne, toiletries and beauty products to the value of $443
and unsuccessfully attempted
to buy clothes online valued at $1,521.
She was convicted of Obtaining Property by Deception and another related
offence. The Tribunal
found the nurse to have engaged in professional
misconduct.
the nurse was found to have stolen $10,000 from a resident at an aged care
facility by transferring the money into her own bank account
on two occasions.
She was convicted of two counts of fraud. The Tribunal found that the
practitioner's conduct was professional
misconduct.
a paramedic stole cash ($580) from the wallet of a deceased patient whilst he
was present in the patient's home in his role as a
paramedic. He was convicted
of one count of stealing. The Tribunal found the paramedic behaved in a way
that constitutes professional
misconduct.
Scheggetman
a nurse stole property from the wife of a patient when she left her handbag
unattended in the patient's room. The nurse was convicted
of numerous
dishonesty offences. The Tribunal did not expressly state a finding of
professional misconduct but made orders requested
by the Applicant which were
sought on the basis that he was not a fit and proper person to hold registration
as a nurse.
are satisfied, and we find, that Ms Bastin's conduct constitutes professional
misconduct under subsections (a) and (c) of the
definition in s 5 of the
National Law.
Specifically,
stealing from patients or clients in their home is conduct which falls
substantially below the standard reasonably
expected of a registered nurse.
Indeed, that conduct falls well below, and is a very significant and fundamental
departure from
those standards. We do not consider that we require any expert
evidence to establish that Ms Bastin's conduct is substantially below
standard reasonably expected because stealing items from patients or their
family members is such an obvious departure from that
conduct is also inconsistent with Ms Bastin being a fit and proper person to
hold registration in the health profession. As
we have mentioned, honesty and
integrity are fundamental and essential characteristics for a nurse. Stealing
from vulnerable clients
in their home is a clear indication of such a lack of
have not made a finding that Ms Bastin's conduct was professional misconduct by
virtue of being disgraceful or dishonourable because
that was not part of the
case put by the Board. In any event, it is unnecessary for us to make such a
finding because Ms Bastin's
conduct squarely falls within the definition of
'professional misconduct' in s 5(a) and 5(c) of the National Law.
the above reasons, we are satisfied, and we find, that Ms Bastin engaged in
'professional misconduct' as defined in s 5(a) and
s 5(c) of the National Law.
Confidentiality order
Board has requested that we make non-publication orders to protect the privacy
of Mr A, Mrs B and Ms C. They refer us to the
where the Tribunal stated:
Non-publication orders over information relating to the health and/or treatment
of persons who are patients is regularly regarded
in the Tribunal as
confidential or otherwise information the publication of which is contrary to
the public interest[.]
agree that it is appropriate for us to make such an order to protect the
identities of the family and their two disabled children
for whom Ms Bastin
was engaged to care for.
have therefore made a separate order under s 62(3) of the SAT Act that the
name and any identifying details of Mr A, Mrs B and
Ms C, are not to be
published and that they are to be referred to by those pseudonyms.
we have explained, we have found that Ms Bastin has engaged in professional
misconduct as defined in s 5(a) and 5(c) of the National
Law and we will
make an order to that effect.
will also hear from the parties as to programming orders which should be made to
facilitate a hearing as to the appropriate sanction
to be imposed in light of
our finding that Ms Bastin has engaged in professional misconduct and as to
The Tribunal finds:
Respondent engaged in 'professional misconduct' as defined in s 5(a) and s 5(c)
of the National Law when, between approximately
July 2019 to 22 October 2019,
she stole numerous items of clothing, shoes, toiletries, food and other
household items from Mr A and
Mrs B's home whilst she was working in their home
as a carer for their two disabled children.
I certify that the preceding paragraph(s)
comprise the reasons for decision of the State Administrative Tribunal.
DR M EVANS-BONNER, SENIOR MEMBER
5 NOVEMBER 2025
Nursing and
Midwifery Board of Australia,
Code of Conduct for Nurses
International Council of Nurses,
The ICN Code of Ethics for Nurses
(revised 2021) (
Code of Ethics
2010 Act, s
WA Application
Application Act, s 5(2).
WA Application
Act, s 5(1).
Application Act, s 42(2).
Practitioner Regulation National Law Regulation (Western Australia)
Statement of
Ms C lodged on 27 September 2024, at para
Applicant's
Proposed Statement of Issues dated 13 December 2024.
included 'Submissions on Conduct and Characterisation' dated 7 March 2024; and
'Applicant's Submissions in Reply on Conduct
and Characterisation' dated 30 May
Bastin's submissions were filed on 10 April 2024, 19 July 2024, 16 October 2024,
12 November 2024 and 29 November 2024.
National Law,
s 196(1)(a).
National Law, s 196(1)(b)(i).
National Law,
196(1)(b)(ii).
National Law, s 196(1)(b)(ii).
Panegyres v Medical Board of Australia
[2020] WASCA 58
Introduction.
Code of Ethics, Elements of the Code, 1. Nurses and people (
National Law, s 41.
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
Legal Profession Complaints Committee and Chang
[2019] WASAT 67
) at [8]. Footnote
, at 368, (per Dixon J).
Applicant's
Bundle, Tab 11, page
Applicant's Bundle, Tab 11, pages 137 and
of the Senior Constable who arrested Ms Bastin, Applicant's Bundle, Tab 11,
pages 125 -
Applicant's Bundle, Tab 11, page
Applicant's Bundle, Tab 11, page 186.
Applicant's
Bundle, Tab 11, page 92 and 174.
Applicant's
Bundle, Tab 11, page 91.
Applicant's
Bundle, Tab 11, pages 89 - 90; see also 'Application in or after a prosecution',
filed by Ms Bastin on 16 October 2024,
where the police requested the
matter be discontinued at the request of the complainant.
See record of
court proceedings, filed by Ms Bastin on 16 October 2024.
Applicant's
Bundle, Tab 13, page 193 and Tab 14, pages 196 -
Applicant's Bundle, Tab 1, pages 4 - 11; see also
pages 13 - 14.
Applicant's Bundle, Tab 16, pages 266 -
Law, s 156 provides that a National Board may take immediate action to suspend a
registered health practitioner if, amongst
other things, the National Board
reasonably believes that because of the practitioner's conduct they pose a
serious risk to persons,
and it is necessary to take immediate action to protect
public health and safety.
Applicant's
Bundle, Tab 17, page
Applicant's Bundle, Tab 17, pages 283, 285 and
Applicant's Bundle, Tab 21, page 289.
Applicant's
Bundle, pages 292 -
Applicant's Bundle, Tab 23, page
Applicant's Bundle, Tab 25, pages 295 - 296.
Applicant's
Bundle, Tab 27, page
Applicant's Bundle, Tab 27, page
Applicant's Bundle, Tab 28, page
Applicant's Bundle, Tab 29, page
Applicant's Bundle, Tab 29, page
Applicant's Bundle, Tab 31, page
Applicant's Bundle, Tab 31, page
Applicant's Bundle, Tab 32, pages 316 -
National Law, s
Document titled, 'Written response to the grounds of the application' filed on
12 August 2024.
Document titled, 'Parties' agreed statement of
issues' filed on 29 November
titled, 'Parties' agreed statement of issues' filed on 29 November
titled, 'Respondent's Minute of Proposed orders' filed 19 July
titled, 'Minute of Consent Orders' filed 16 October 2024, original
Applicant's Submissions on Conduct and Characterisation dated 7 March 2024, para
Applicant's Bundle, Tab 11, page
Health Care Complaints Commission v Black
[2014] NSWCATOD 35
Health Care Complaints Commission v Litchfield
[1997] 41 NSWLR 630 (
, at [18] - [20].
Veterinary Surgeons Board of Western Australia v Alexander
[2013] WASC 136
, at [59]. Footnotes
Act, s 32(1), see also
Medical Board of Australia and Woollard
[2012] WASAT 209
Act, s 32(4).
SAT Act, s 32(7)(a).
letter from AHPRA dated 29 January 2020 which states that the Board took
immediate action to suspend Ms Bastin's registration
on 28 January 2020,
Applicant's Bundle, page 266.
National Law,
National Law, s 244(f).
Applicant's
Bundle, Tab 9, page
of Mr Edwardes, paras 2 and
of Mr Edwardes, paras 7 -
Applicant's
Bundle, Tab 9, pages 74 -
of Mr Edwardes, paras 9 -
of Mr Edwardes, para
of Mr A, para 5; Statement of Mrs B, paras 4 -
of Ms C, Applicant's Bundle, page
of Mr A, paras 13 - 18; Statement of Mrs B, para
of Mrs B, paras 25 -
Applicant's Bundle, Tab 2, page 13.
At Home Care
File Note of telephone conversation with Ms Bastin written on 24 October 2019,
Tab 14, Applicant's Bundle, page
Western Australia Police Incident Report dated 29 October 2019, Applicant's
Bundle, Tab 11,
Applicant's Bundle, Tab 4, pages 20 - 22.
Video Statement of Ms C, Attachment B; see also Applicant's Bundle, Tab 7, pages
and Video Statement of Ms C, para 4.
Applicant's
Bundle, Tab 14, page
Applicant's Bundle, Tab 14, page 234.
Applicant's
Bundle, Tab 2, page 13.
and Midwifery Board of Australia and Mehra
[2022] VR 99
and Midwifery Board of Australia v Sotingco
[2018] VCAT 1615
Nursing and Midwifery Board of Australia v BCD
[2024] QCAT 485
Health Ombudsman v Roza
[2022] QCAT 420
Care Complaints Commission v Scheggetman
[2023] NSWCATOD 48
Scheggetman
Medical Board of Australia v ZQX
[2024] QCAT 532
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (625 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter