URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WASTR/2004/53.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:08:51
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Corser and The Owners of 5 Gairloch Street Applecross - Strata Plan 18807 [2004] WASTR 53 (21 September 2004)
STRATA TITLES REFEREE
MR R J KRONBERGER, REFEREE
DATE OF ORDER :
21 SEPTEMBER 2004
PRINCIPAL ORDER
FILE NUMBER :
ST/2004-000069
STRATA PLAN NUMBER :
JOHN WOOLFITT CORSER
THE OWNERS OF 5 GAIRLOCH STREET
APPLECROSS – STRATA PLAN 18807
Respondents
Catchwords:
Real property – strata titles – approval of structural additions
to a lot – effect of demolition
Legislation:
Strata Titles Act 1985
Application dismissed
Representation:
Applicant :
Respondent :
Solicitors:
Applicant :
Respondent :
Case(s) referred to in judgment(s):
Cases(s) also cited:
1 Approval required for structural works within a
2 The Applicant is John Woolfitt Corser as the proprietor of Lot 1 on
Strata Plan 18807 ("the Strata Plan").
Plan and relevant Act
3 The Strata Plan was registered on 29 March 1990 pursuant to the
Titles Act 1985
") which continues to be the relevant Act.
4 In these Reasons, unless otherwise specified, all references to sections and
Schedules are, respectively, references to sections
of and Schedules to the
Previous application
5 Under my file reference ST/2003-000090, the Applicant made an application to
me in respect of his Lot 1 (“the 2003 application”)
for approval of
plans for a new residence on his Lot 1. Although the application was dismissed,
some of the material in my Reasons
for Decision in that matter are relevant to
and will be incorporated into these Reasons, with any necessary additions or
modifications.
6 The parcel is at the corner of Gairloch Street and MacDonald Street,
Applecross. The Strata Plan describes it as comprising three
single-storey
brick and tile dwellings at 5 Gairloch Street, Applecross. Each lot, as
shown on the Strata Plan, includes a
residential
portion, a 4m
room and some adjacent land.
7 The Applicant's Lot 1 comprises approximately the north-eastern half of the
parcel. It has frontages to Gairloch Street and MacDonald
8 Lot 2, owned by Henry Sainsbury Rees ("Mr Rees") is at the centre of the
parcel. Its frontage is to MacDonald Street.
9 Lot 3, owned by Peck Kheng Goh ("Ms Goh"), is at the south-western end of the
parcel. Its frontage is to MacDonald Street.
10 It is a 'single-tier scheme', as defined in
, because no lot nor part
of a lot is above or below another lot.
entitlements
11 The unit entitlements of the lots are:
entitlements
Previous alterations to Lot 1
12 The Applicant advises that before he became registered as the proprietor of
Lot 1 on 24 June 2002, the residential portion
Lot 1 had already been
demolished, with the approval of Mr Rees and Ms Goh.
13 No replacement building has yet been constructed in respect of Lot 1 and no
changes have been made to the Strata Plan since the
demolition.
14 As no notifications of changes of by-laws are recorded on the Strata Plan,
the by-laws of the Strata Company are, pursuant to
, the "standard"
by-laws contained in Schedules 1 and 2.
15 The Applicant has sought an Order pursuant to
An application
under that section may be made by a lot proprietor
who has sought approval from
his or her Strata Company, under
, to the erection of a structure or to the
making of any alteration
of a structural kind to or extension of a structure
or her lot. The relevant provisions of
and its related
be referred to later in these Reasons.
The Order sought is
"An order declaring that the Approval required under Section 7 of the Act
for the proposed construction of a dwelling on Lot 1,
Strata Plan 18807,
tabled at a duly convened meeting on 13 May 2004, be deemed to have been
given by the Strata Company,
Street, Applecross WA
Section 103F
16 Section 103F includes:
"(1) A proprietor of a lot who has
applied for but not obtained an approval under section 7B may apply to a
referee for an order
this section.
(2) An order under this section is an order declaring that the approval
required under section 7 or 7A, as the case may be, is
be deemed to have
been given by the proprietor or the strata company.
(3) On the making of an application under subsection (1), a referee may
make an order under this section if he is satisfied that
(a) should have been given under section 7 or 7A, as the case may be;
(b) has been unreasonably withheld,
by the proprietor or the strata company."
Lot boundaries
17 The now-demolished building, which contained the Lot 1 residential portion,
shared a common wall with Lot 2 and the Lot 2 residential
portion shared and
continues to share a common wall with Lot 3's residential portion.
18 Pursuant to ss 3(1) and (2) each portion of each lot has at all times been a
cubic space. Initially, the portions within the
residences were cubic spaces
having, as their boundaries, the upper surface of the floor, the inner surface
of the perimeter walls
and the under surface of the ceiling of the parts of the
respective buildings in which they were situated.
Everything else, including the ceilings, roofs and the common walls between Lots
1 and 2 and between Lots 2 and 3, was common property.
19 Similarly the storage buildings were cubic spaces defined in the same
20 In relation to the portions of the lots that are not within a residence or
storage building, the Strata Plan contains an endorsement
"Strata of the lots external to the buildings extends between 5 metres below and
10 metres above the upper surfaces of the ground
floor of the respective
adjoining lots except where covered."
21 That endorsement sets the upper and lower horizontal boundaries of the cubic
spaces that make up the external portions of the
lots. The outer boundaries of
those external areas were, and continue to be, the respectively – adjacent
boundaries of the
22 The airspace above the residential portions (the “covered”
portions) and above the upper limit of the external portions
has, at all times
since the Strata Plan was registered, been, and continues to be, common property
owned by the proprietors of the
three lots as tenants in common in the same
proportions as the respective unit entitlements allocated to the lots.
23 A new Division 2A, comprising s 21A to s 21Z, was introduced into the
on 20 January 1997, pursuant to the Strata Titles
Amendment Act 1996.
24 Section 21A defines 'an existing small strata scheme' as a strata
"(a) in which there are not more than 5 lots; and
the strata plan for which
was registered before 1 January 1998.
Accordingly, Division 2A of the
applies to the Strata Plan.
25 (There is one exception to the applicability of that definition but that
exception is not relevant in the present case).
26 In these circumstances,
allowed the Strata Company to resolve, prior
to 20 July 1997, (being the "change-over date" prescribed
to change the boundaries of those portions of the lots that were within the
buildings to the respective external surfaces of those
respective buildings. No
such resolution has been recorded on the Strata Plan.
Section 21M
then provided that if by the "change-over date", 20 July 1997, a
strata company to which
had not passed such a
resolution, as in the present case, and if, in the meantime, no proprietor had
lodged with the Registrar
Titles a notice of objection pursuant to
in the present case, then on 20 July 1997 the boundaries of the lots were
"automatically" by
to those prescribed by
Section 3AB
"(1) Where this section applies the
boundaries of any cubic space referred to in paragraph (a) of the
definition of “
section 3(1)
regardless of the exact location of the lines referred to in that
paragraph —
(a) the external surfaces of the building occupying the area represented on
that floor plan —
(b) despite paragraph (a), where 2 lots —
(i) have a common or party wall, the centre plane of that wall; or
(ii) have buildings on them that are joined, the plane or planes at which
they are joined."
29 This means that, in the present case, the boundaries of the residential and
store room portions of each lot were extended on
20 July 1997 to the external
surfaces of the respective buildings containing them, except that in relation to
any shared wall, the
boundary between the lots became the centre plane of that
wall or, if the buildings were joined, the plane or planes at which they
30 No meeting or resolution was required in respect of those boundary
extensions.
31 There has been no re-subdivision or other resolution by the Strata Company
since 1997 to amend those changed boundaries.
Applicant's submissions
32 Between May and November 2002 the Applicant had discussions with the
Planning Officers of the relevant local government, the
City of Melville ("the
City"), about proposals to construct a new Lot 1 residence.
33 By November 2002, the Applicant had provided to each of Mr Rees and Ms Goh a
set of house plans, identified as "
to his proposed new Lot 1
34 In March 2003, the City gave conditional planning approval for plan
35 At an Extraordinary General Meeting of the Strata Company, held on 10 May
2003 ("the May 2003 EGM") to discuss the Applicant's
proposal, both Mr Rees and
Ms Goh voted against the proposal.
36 The Minutes of the May 2003 EGM record that Mr Rees objected to the proposal
because of:
"(a) The non-completion of rectification items on the
(b) The non-compliance of the wall with the building code and fire
regulations;
(c) Dissatisfaction with the bulk and design of the building."
37 The same Minutes record that Ms Goh objected to the proposal because the
proposed house was:
"Bulky and not in keeping with the rest of the
development."
38 It appears that the wall referred to by Mr Rees is the part of the wall
which remained on or adjacent to the boundary between
Lot 1 and Lot 2, after the
demolition of the original Lot 1 residence. It would not form part of the
proposed new residence.
39 I have been provided with a letter dated 4 June 2003 from the City's Manager
of Planning and Development Services to the Applicant,
in which it is
"... with respect to the single storey grouped dwellings approved on the subject
site on 12 March 2003, the eaves height and maximum
height is deemed to
The development is not considered to be bulky in nature as it abuts a two storey
residence, which are common throughout Applecross.
The approved roof pitch is
not uncommon. There is no objection from the City of Melville Planning and
Development Services.
The City is satisfied that the approved residence on the subject site is in
keeping with the rest of the development ...
In this instance, the approved residence is deemed to comply in keeping with the
rest of the development."
40 In June 2003, the Applicant arranged for the preparation of a revised plan
of his proposed residence. That plan was identified
Copies of Plan
were provided to Mr Rees and Ms Goh.
41 On 22 June 2003, following a meeting with and correspondence with the City
and the Applicant in relation to fire rating and Building
Code issues, the
Applicant wrote to Mr Rees and Ms Goh enclosing copies of the City's
requirements, as set out in a letter dated
16 June 2003 from the City.
42 The 16 June 2003 letter from the City
"When a building licence application is submitted to Council please specify a
fire blanket of 500 mm wide from the gutter line
the garage and roof to
achieve a FRL rating of 60/60/60. This will comply with the fire separation
required for the dwelling
and the Building Code of Australia.
It will not be required to increase the fire rating of strata Lot 2
43 The Applicant has pointed out that, although the original Lot 1 residence
adjoined the Lot 2 residence, the proposed new residence
would be one metre away
from and therefore a lesser hazard than previously, as far as fire rating is
44 The Applicant advises that, following the May 2003 EGM, he and Ms Goh
reached an agreement, signed by Ms Goh on 4 July
"... whereby Ms Goh agreed to approve the application for the construction of
the said dwelling. This agreement was based on a compromise
where the height of
the roof was reduced to an agreed height of 5.5 metres – the plan 'S5' was
updated to reflect this change."
45 The Applicant states that Mr Rees was informed of the agreement reached with
Ms Goh. He was given a copy of the "S5" plan and
an opportunity to comment on
it, but his response, on 11 July 2003, was that he would not approve it. He
gave, as his reason for
refusal to approve, that the Building Code and fire
regulations were not being complied with. This was apparently in spite of
City's letter of 16 June 2003.
46 The Strata Company held an Extraordinary General Meeting on 13 March 2004
("the March 2004 EGM") at which all 3 lot proprietors
were present.
47 By agreement, an "observer" and a strata titles "adviser", were also
48 The meeting voted on the following
resolution,
"To approve the application of the construction of a single storey dwelling Plan
S5 on Lot 1. Strata Plan 18807 by resolution without
dissent. The Application
and Plan S5 of the proposed house are attached to their
49 The Minutes of the March 2004 EGM record that the Applicant and Ms Goh voted
in favour, but that Mr Rees cast a dissenting vote,
with Mr Rees advising that
his reasons for voting against the motion were
"1. That the
proposal if carried out will result in a structure that is visible from outside
the lot and that is not in keeping with
the rest of the development; and
2. That the carrying out of the proposal will contravene a specified by-law
or specified by-laws of the Strata Company".
50 The Minutes also record that:
"In relation to 2 Mr Rees felt this was a valid objection because in his opinion
it would cover the issue of the non-compliance of
the common wall with regard to
Fire Regulations and the Building Code".
Statutory provisions relating to
51 Section 7 provides that the proprietor of a lot on a strata plan shall not
cause or permit any structure to be erected, or any
alteration of a structural
kind to, or extension of, a structure on his lot except with the prior approval
of the other proprietors
or, in the absence of that approval, pursuant to an
approval expressed in a resolution without dissent by the Strata Company.
52 Section 7B sets out the requirements for an application to a strata company
for approval.
53 Where such an application is made, s 7(4) requires the strata company to
submit it to a general meeting.
54 The Notice of the Extraordinary General Meeting at which the application is
to be considered must contain the information prescribed
in s 7(4) and (5).
55 Section 7(4)(d) provides that a vote against a resolution to approve such an
application:
"... is of no effect unless the person casting the vote discloses as a ground
for his vote one or more of the grounds permitted by
sub-section
56 In the case of a “vacant” lot, there are only 2 grounds for
objection. The first, as set out in s 7(5)(a), is
“ that the carrying out of the proposal will breach the plot ratio
restrictions on open space requirements for the
57 The second is in s 7(5)(c) which refers to
“any other ground that is
prescribed”.
58 Regulation 31 of the Strata Titles General Regulations prescribes the other
“the fact that the carrying out of a proposal will contravene a specified
by-law or specified by-laws of the Strata
59 In relation to s 7(5)(a), 7(6) defines “vacant lot”
“ a lot that is wholly unimproved apart from having merged improvements
within the meaning of that expression in the
Valuation of Land Act
Valuation of Land Act 1978
defines “merged improvements”
“any works in the nature of draining, filling, excavation, grading or
levelling of the land, retaining walls or other structures
or works for that
purpose, the removal of rocks, stone or soil, and the clearing of timber, scrub
or other vegetation”
61 On the basis alone that the Lot 1 storeroom shown on the Strata Plan has not
been removed, Lot 1 is not a "vacant lot," but,
in any event, Lot 1 is shown on
the Strata Plan as including a residence.
62 External areas may be included as parts of a lot on a strata plan but they
must be defined, in accordance with Reg. 5(2) of the
Strata Titles General
Regulations 1996
, by reference to linear connections measured against a
slated surface of a floor, wall, ceiling or permanent structural feature shown
on the Strata Plan. In the present case, the external portions of Lot 1 have
been defined by reference to the building on Lot 2.
63 Where works of the kind referred to in
are proposed to be carried
out within a lot that is not a "vacant lot", the proprietor of another lot on
the strata plan may vote
against the proposal, but only on one or more of the
grounds of objection set out in
, (b) and (c).
64 The grounds set out in
"in the case of a lot that is not a vacant lot, that the carrying out of the
result in a structure that is visible from outside the lot and that is not in
keeping with the rest of the
development;
may effect the structural
soundness of the building; or
may interfere
with any easement created by
65 A further ground is set out in
which I have quoted earlier in
these Reasons.
66 A proprietor who casts a vote against such a proposal must specify which of
the grounds specified in
is or are being relied on as a basis for
that dissenting vote. If there is a dissenting vote, the proprietor seeking the
is entitled to make an application to me, under s 103F, to
overcome that dissenting vote.
67 I am able to make such an order if I am satisfied that the approval should
have been given but has been unreasonably
Submissions in Response
68 Ms Goh has provided me with a summary of the recent history of the parcel,
covering the period from 1998 to the present, confirming
earlier attempts to
obtain approval for the redevelopment of Lot 1.
69 Mr Rees has advised me that he had not, until recently, been aware of a
letter dated May 2003 addressed to him by the City's
Principal Building Surveyor
confirming that the wall between Lot 1 and his Lot 2 does meet Building Code of
Australia Regulations
and confirming that it is a "fire wall" which complies
with those regulations.
70 He has advised me that if he is provided with a letter in like terms,
authorised by the City, he believes that
"it will dispose of most of the original disagreement and I would then be
confident we can agree to renegotiate the other matter
to finality without the
necessary of a formal
Considerations
71 In my Reasons for Decision in respect of Application
ST/2003-000090, I held that I could not deal with an application
103F unless and until a specific proposal, in respect of that plan, in
compliance with s 7 and s 7B, had been formally put
to, and voted on, at a
general meeting of the Strata Company.
72 I consider that the Notice calling the March 2004 EGM was made in
accordance with the requirements of s 7 and the related requirements
Strata Titles General Regulations 1996
plan was approved by Ms Goh on 4 July 2003 and again at the March
2004 EGM. This means that the proprietors of two of the three
lots consider
that the proposed new dwelling is "in keeping with the rest
of the development", which is a view shared by the City of Melville's Manager of
Planning and Development.
74 In my 2003 Reasons for Decision, I pointed out that, before the original Lot
1 residence was demolished, the air space above
the Lot 1 residential portion
was, and continued to be, common property owned by the three proprietors as
tenants in common in shares
proportional to the respective unit entitlements of
their lots. This is still the case.
75 I also noted that
a) if any part of the Applicant's
proposed new residence would be higher than the upper surface level of the roof
of the original
Lot 1 residence, or above the upper limit of any part of the
external portions of Lot 1, a re-subdivision would be required to incorporate
into Lot 1 so much of the common property airspace as is necessary for the
construction of the proposed new residence. In such a
case, Lot 1 would have to
be re-defined as a cubic space with dimensions sufficient to incorporate the
proposed new Lot 1 residence
and the proprietors of Lots 2 and 3 would have to
agree to their respective interests in that airspace being incorporated into Lot
1, as part of the re-subdivision process.
b) A possible (but less satisfactory) alternative to a re-subdivision
would be the adoption by the Strata Company, by a resolution
without dissent, of
a by-law of the kind referred to in
, granting to the Applicant the
exclusive use of those parts of the common property airspace into which the
proposed new residence
would encroach.
c) Even if a there is a re-subdivision or the Strata Company adopts
and duly registers an appropriate
by-law, the Applicant will still need
the consent in writing of the proprietors of Lots 2 and 3, or an appropriate
resolution without
dissent or an order under s 103F, before being able to
proceed with his proposed new residence.
76 In the light of Mr Rees’ response, as quoted earlier in these
Reasons, there appears to be a real opportunity to achieve
an amicable
settlement of the dispute.
77 My Order is that:
“The application be dismissed”
DATED: 21 SEPTEMBER 2004
_________________________________
RJ KRONBERGER
STRATA TITLES REFEREE
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (95.6 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter