URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WACIC/2022/8.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:56:59
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
HUNTER [2022] WACIC 8 (18 May 2022)
CRIMINAL INJURIES COMPENSATION
ASSESSOR OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
CRIMINAL INJURIES COMPENSATION ACT 2003
[2022] WACIC 8
26 OCTOBER 2021 and 7 DECEMBER 2021
DELIVERED :
18 MAY 2022
FILE NO/S :
CIC 1907 of 2020
MITCHELL JAMES HUNTER
Unlawful wounding - Proved offence - Burden of
proof - Victim committed a separate offence - Behaviour of victim contributed to
- Turns on own facts
Legislation:
Criminal Code
, s 223, s 245, s 246, s
248, s 313, s 317, s 254
Criminal Injuries Compensation Act 2003
Compensation refused
Representation:
Not applicable
Solicitors:
A & E Legal PTY LTD
Case(s) referred to in decision(s):
Attorney General for Western Australia v Her Honour Judge Schoombee
Bennetts v Smith
[2022] WADC 32
Bodney v Assessor of Compensation
(2000) 24 SR (WA) 299
Bull v Hobbs
[2009] WADC 128
Commonwealth v Pillifeant, unreported; SCt of ACT; 28 November 1990, Miles
Hutchings v Lachlan
[2012] WADC 89
[2013] WACIC 3
Layton v Northern Territory of Australia & Anor
[2002] NTSC 6
Masciantonio v The Queen
[1995] HCA 67
(1995) 183 CLR 58
McDavitt v McDavitt
[2013] WADC 22
[21] and [22]
McDavitt v McDavitt
[2013] WADC 22
[30] - [31]
[2017] WADC 168
[2017] WADC 92
[30] and [114]
Re Richardson
[2009] WADC 93
Saric v Duric
[2021] WADC 53
[2017] WACIC 10
[2001] WADC 86
Underwood v Underwood
[2018] WADC 13
[55] - [62]
for Decision
application dated 18 November 2020 Mitchell James Hunter
(the applicant) claimed compensation for injuries he suffered as a
consequence
of an offence committed by Dylan Anthony Bolin (the offender)
on 20 August 2019 (the offence). The applicant was born on
30 December
1994 and is currently aged 27 years.
application was made pursuant to
Criminal Injuries
Compensation
(the Act). This section authorises an assessor
to award compensation if satisfied the claimed injury occurred as a consequence
the commission of a proved offence.
of the Act defines a
proved offence as a crime, misdemeanour or simple offence of which a person has
been convicted.
The Offence
circumstances of the offence were set out in the Statement of Material Facts, as
At about 8:30pm on Tuesday 20 August 2019 the accused was at ... Wicklow
Street, Ellenbrook. The accused attempted to gain entry
inside the house by
removing the fly screen and attempting to open a locked window. The accused had
previously stayed with the victim
at the house for the last month and had his
property inside. As he could not gain entry inside, he lay on the ground by the
door waiting for the victim to return home.
The accused was roused by the victim who hit the accused once on the head with a
vacuum cleaner pole. The victim told the accused
he was not welcome at the
house. The accused went across the road and sat between the bushes swearing at
the victim. The victim
walked over and hit the suspect a second time to the
head with the vacuum cleaner pole.
The accused took out a knife from the front pocket of his jumper, removed it
from it's casing and lunged at the victim, stabbing
him one time to his abdomen.
The knife penetrated the victim 7-9 centimeters (
) deep and penetrated
The accused ran off from the scene and dropped the knife into a portable toilet
Shortly after, the accused returned to the scene and lay in the back yard of ...
Wicklow Street, Ellenbrook where he was arrested
and conveyed to Midland Police
offender was convicted of unlawful wounding in the Magistrates Court at Midland
on 15 October 2019. I am satisfied a proved
offence as defined in the Act
was constituted.
support of the application, the applicant provided a victim impact statement
dated 16 November 2020, a WA Police Information Report
for Criminal
Injuries Compensation dated 12 August 2020, a police statement from the
applicant dated 31 August 2019, medical records
from St John of God
Hospital Midland, medical records from Royal Perth Hospital and patient records
from Broadway Medical Centre.
I identify these documents, where relevant, in
more detail below. Subsequently the applicant also submitted the Sentencing
from the Midland Magistrates Court in relation to the offence.
obtained the Police Brief and a copy of the Electronic record of interview of
the offender. In addition, due to issues later raised
by the applicant with
respect to a prior history between him and the offender, I obtained an
"IR trawl" of all reports to police
in relation to the applicant where he
was either a victim or a witness.
issued a notice pursuant to
section 19(1)(a)
of the Act to Ellenbrook Medical
Centre for the applicant's medical records, and to St John of God Hospital,
Midland for the offender's
medical records on the date of the offence.
his witness statement to police dated 31 August 2018 the applicant stated
the offender was a friend who had been living him for
the past month, sleeping
in a small room at the address and who was not paying rent but was helping out
by buying food.
applicant stated the relationship with the offender had been "not great" whilst
he was living there and provided examples of
conflict between them. The
applicant stated he received a telephone call from the offender's brother in
relation to whether the
offender could stay there that night. The applicant
advised he did not want the offender to stay there and stated he was of the
belief the offender would not be staying at his that night. The applicant set
out the circumstances of the offending as follows:
was in bed in my bedroom at the time.
heard a voice shouting "Mitchy, Mitchy".
recognised the voice as being Dillon as he is the only person I know who calls
me "Mitchy" and only does it when he is in psycho
ignored him and after a few minutes I heard him go through the side gate and
come to my bedroom window.
he was knocking on the window and calling my name but ignored him.
a couple of minutes I heard him walk back round to the front of the house and
knock on the communal door to the property.
a couple of minutes I heard Patrick speaking to Dillon at the front door.
heard Patrick lend Dillon his mobile phone to contact me.
a few seconds my mobile phone rang and I answered it.
was on the other end of the phone and he asked me if I was in.
told him that I was out and at an exgirlfriends (
I told Dillon this he said "Oh fuck okay bro" and the call ended.
then heard Dillon walk back to the side of the house and was trying to pull the
flyscreen off the bedroom window and tried to get
made some noise to alert Patrick.
heard Dillon walk back around the front of the house and I went to go and speak
to Dillon about him trying to break in.
the time I was only wearing black track pants and had no shoes or top on.
went to the sliding door and opened it.
was sat on the floor near to the sliding door.
was wearing a red jumper, Everlast track pants and Assics (
) trainers.
to him on the floor was (
had never seen the knife before and I do not own a knife like it.
asked Dillon why he was trying to break in for.
I spoke to Dillon he jumped straight up, picked up the knife and stepped towards
had the knife in his right hand.
was scared I thought Dillon was going to stab me so I picked up part of a vacuum
cleaner that was by the door and hit Dillon to
told Dillon to leave and he walked across the road.
sat in a bush at the front of the house opposite and I thought he would come
walked across the road to tell him to leave.
still had the vacuum cleaner part in my hand to defend myself as I knew Dillon
still had the knife.
I got close to him I told him to leave.
said "I'm going to fucking kill you bro" and stood up out of the bush.
then stabbed me twice to the body with the knife.
was in shock and managed to hit Dillon to the head with the vacuum cleaner part.
vacuum part slipped out of my hand.
ran back into the house via the sliding door and closed it behind
his Victim Impact Statement dated 16 November 2020 the applicant described
receiving abdominal wounds, which were washed out,
stapled and dressed at Royal
Perth Hospital. He stated he remained in fear of his life and so discharged
against medical advice,
before being apprehended on his way to the train station
and being returned to the hospital. He described attending St John of God
Hospital in Midland due to ongoing pain and an impact on his daily function,
including his ability to participate in martial arts
activities. The applicant
stated he had pre-existing anxiety and depression which worsened after the
offence, and he had an ongoing
fear the offender or one of his friends may hurt
him which restricted the applicant from leaving the home. He stated the
he was wearing, namely tracksuit pants worth $120, were destroyed as a
result of blood stains and had to be thrown out. The applicant
also described
an impact on his earning capacity, noting he was not working at the time but
since the offence he was unable to obtain
work as a security guard or as a
trainer in a gym. He also referred to additional losses by way of travel
expenses of approximately
600 km, past treatment expenses estimated at $200
and future treatment expenses he estimated would be $5,000.
Royal Perth Hospital records indicate the applicant sustained two stab wounds in
his upper abdomen resulting in a Grade II liver
laceration. On
20 August 2019 the applicant underwent a CT scan and chest x-ray. He was
noted to be agitated, was uncooperative
with treatment and to display drug
seeking behaviour, repeatedly requesting oxycodone 10 mg tablets and when
refused, discharged
against medical advice. It was determined by medical
practitioners he did not have capacity to discharge against medical advice
police were called.
At approximately 6 00pm on 21 August 2018 the applicant was returned
to Royal Perth Hospital by ambulance. The inpatient notes
state he rode a
pushbike home, and whilst at home took an unknown quantity of pain medication.
He was found collapsed at a phone
booth and an ambulance was called. On
readmission to hospital the applicant was agitated and was required to be
restrained for treatment.
His wounds were washed under local anaesthetic and
stapled. He was kept sedated overnight and discharged on 22 August 2019.
applicant described the offender to hospital staff as his "best friend" and
"housemate".
applicant attended Royal Perth Hospital on 5 September 2019 for a review of
his wound at which time it was noted the staples
had been removed by his general
practitioner on the previous Sunday, which I calculate to be 1 September
applicant attended St John of God Hospital in Midland on 23 August
2019 complaining of feeling feverish, concerned his wound
was oozing and
requesting a prescription of tramadol (an opioid medication). On examination he
was noted to be afebrile, vitally
stable and with mild guarding on palpation
near his wound. After consultation by treating practitioners with Royal Perth
he was discharged with stronger analgesia and advised to see his
general practitioner in relation to his wound the following week.
The applicant
returned to St John of God Hospital in Midland on 29 August 2019
requesting the stitches be taken out of his wound.
He presented as "agitated,
pacing and anxious" and "paranoid,
, describing
pain levels of 8/10. On examination the wound was noted to be red, dry, intact
with no exudate. The applicant left
the hospital before medical officer review.
Also contained on the hospital file was a referral from the applicant's general
practitioner
to the Psychiatry Department of the hospital dated 12 July 2019,
requesting an assessment of the applicant given his history of difficulty
concentrating, low energy level, mood swings, panic attacks and a dislike of
going out with a difficulty in finding work.
applicant provided a copy of his records from Broadway Medical Centre from 10
December 2017 to 28 August 2019. The applicant
attended Dr Shalinder
Mamotra on 24 August 2019 with respect to the offence and underwent a wound
check. The wound was noted to
have no signs of infection but there was swelling
around the wound. The applicant was prescribed tramadol 100mg. There are no
records relevant to the offence, with the balance of the entries
addressing the applicant's requests to be prescribed tramadol and
obtained the medical records from Ellenbrook Medical Centre. These records
cover the period 11 December 2017 to 24 July 2020.
On 27 August 2019
the applicant attended Dr David Hyman, requesting a script of temazepam but
was refused as he had been recently
prescribed it by another doctor. On
16 September 2019 the applicant attended Dr Ali Hashemlooo, again
seeking temazepam, but was
prescribed alternate medication and referred to a
psychologist. On both 17 September 2019 and 18 September 2019, the
applicant attended
Dr Nazanin Ghasri requesting temazepam. The applicant was
diagnosed with benzodiazapene dependency by Dr Ghasri, and referred to
Midland Community Mental Health Centre on 18 September 2019. On
4 November 2019 the applicant attended Dr Trevor Hoffman who noted
drug dependency problem and recorded the applicant suffering from an adverse
reaction to temaze, namely paranoia. He prescribed
Dermagel for the applicant's
abdominal scarring and referred him to Headspace in Midland. The applicant
attended on 20 November
2019 and 25 November 2019, seeking temazepam
prescriptions which were refused. Whilst the Royal Perth Hospital records refer
the applicant's staples having been removed on 1 September 2019, I could find
no reference to this procedure in the medical records
of Broadway Medical Centre
or Ellenbrook Medical Centre. The clinical notes of both medical practices
refer to the applicant attending
other medical centres and is therefore likely
the applicant had additional medical treatment at another medical centre the
which he has not provided.
Police Brief included a witness statement from Patrick Gibbs dated
21 August 2019. Mr Gibbs resided in a property adjacent to
that of the
applicant. He advised police he knew both the applicant and offender by sight.
The applicant was living at the property
when Mr Gibbs moved in and the
offender had been residing there for about two to three weeks prior to the
offence. The property
had adjoining walls which were thin and he could hear if
there were any arguments in the applicant's unit. Mr Gibbs was aware of
issues between the applicant and offender between 18 August 2019 to
20 August 2019. At about 9.00 pm on 20 August 2019 Mr Gibbs
heard banging at the front of the property and went outside to look. He noted
the lights at the applicant's unit were turned off.
He saw the offender who
told him he was trying to get in as the applicant wasn't there. The offender
advised Mr Gibbs he would
sleep on the front patio and Mr Gibbs
returned inside. At about 10.22 pm the applicant telephoned Mr Gibbs.
The applicant spoke
quietly and said "Get him off the front door" and "He's
trying to smash in, break in, call the cops". The applicant didn't tell
Mr Gibbs what was happening and did not answer when Mr Gibbs asked if
he was home. A short time later the offender asked Mr Gibbs
for the use of
his phone to call the applicant, and Mr Gibbs allowed him to do so. He
then heard the applicant and offender talking
in the shared hallway but did not
hear the substance of that discussion. However, he heard the offender saying
"Let me in". Mr
Gibbs told the offender the applicant was not at home.
The offender responded by saying the applicant was home and then left
Gibb's home. A short time later Mr Gibbs heard the applicant and
offender talking. About 10 minutes later, at just prior to 10.30
the applicant banged on Mr Gibb's door and called for help. Mr Gibbs
saw the applicant was injured and then drove him to the
police station to meet
the ambulance.
Police Brief contained a number of photographs of the applicant's wounds, the
knife referred to above, the bloodstains to the
house, the vehicle Mr Gibbs
drove and the area where the applicant was stabbed and of the applicant's unit
and the surrounding area.
"IR trawl" containing the police reports of all incidents where the applicant
was either a victim or witness contained no additional
incidents between the
applicant and the offender.
Progress of application
8 December 2020 I wrote to the applicant's solicitors advising I had
reached a preliminary determination to refuse the application.
I advised I had
found the applicant had committed a separate offence of common assault pursuant
to section 313 of the
Criminal Code
(CC) by reason of having struck
the offender with the vacuum cleaner pole. Accordingly, I advised I was unable
to make an award
in favour of the applicant pursuant to section 39 of the
Act. In addition, I found the applicant's conduct in striking the offender
the vacuum pole had contributed to the applicant sustaining injury and pursuant
to section 41 of the Act I considered the application
should be refused. I
gave the applicant's solicitors until 8 January 2021 to provide submissions
in response to the preliminary
determination.
21 December 2020 the applicant's solicitors provided submissions in
response. The applicant submitted he hit the offender on
the head the first
time only after the offender tried to break into his home and he was threatened
with a knife, and he hit the offender
the second time only after he had been
stabbed by the offender. The applicant's submission which contained an
analysis of the evidence
and asserted the applicant's evidence should be
preferred to that of the offender on the basis it was supported by Mr Gibbs.
setting out the evidence of Mr Gibbs the applicant referred to the
police brief, primarily to an Application for a Search Warrant
REF: 105863 sworn
by Detective First Class Constable Reid on 21 August 2019 which lists what
he understood the evidence of Mr Gibbs
would be, namely:
At about 11:46pm on Tuesday 20th August 2019, Police were contacted by Patrick
GIBBS (GIBBS) who advised he was conveying Mitchell
HUNTER (the victim) by
vehicle to Ellenbrook Police Station with a serious stab wound to his stomach.
GIBBS advised that the victim
was involved in a heated argument with a former
housemate (the suspect) who was recently evicted from the address but returned
unannounced.
The argument escalated when the suspect attempted to re-entered
] the address without permission. The argument escalated and the
victim armed himself with a metal pole to prevent the suspect from
entering. A
physical altercation ensued, during which the victim was stabbed to the
abdominal area with a knife.
applicant asserts this supports his version of events because Mr Gibbs
agrees the offender was evicted from the premises and
was trying to gain access
to the property when there was a heated argument and the offender only struck
him after the argument.
However, the version of Mr Gibbs' evidence, as set out
in the Application for a Search Warrant, is not entirely consistent with
Gibbs' police statement. Mr Gibbs only confirmed the offender was
trying to gain access to the property following which there was
a discussion
between the applicant and offender subsequent to which the applicant was
13 December 2019 the applicant lodged a copy of the transcript of
proceedings before Magistrate Sharratt on 13 December 2019.
11 January 2019 I drew the applicant's attention to comments made on
sentencing of the offender, namely:
There's also the migratory effect of the degree of provocation, which, although
it doesn’t justify or excuse an unlawful wounding,
nevertheless goes some
way to explain. I mean, first, he attended at those premises and probably gave
that guy a bit of a shock
on his doorstep. Then he went over and yelled out
stuff at him. And he has come over with a vacuum cleaner. He didn't need to,
he could have stayed inside his house, but he didn’t. He went over to
Dylan and hit him on the head, and, to some extent,
was the author of his own
misfortune.
20 January 2021, the applicant raised a concern he had not been given the
opportunity to testify at the proceedings and so any
findings made by the
Magistrate were based on submissions from the prosecution and defence counsel.
On 12 February 2021 the applicant
made further submissions in relation the
circumstances of the incident, noting the version of events put forward by the
to the Magistrate was a "novel creation of his own which seems to be
a blend of the two versions".
To what extent are the parties bound by the facts of the proven offence
the applicant's concern he did not agree with the facts as set out in the
Statement of Material Facts, I gave consideration
to whether I was bound by the
facts of the proven offence or could consider additional information.
Underwood v
summarises the relevant principles as follows:
First, in a CICA appeal, the offender cannot re-litigate the facts which led to
the proved offence; it is not a backdoor means by
which to appeal the
conviction.
Second, a plea of guilty to a criminal charge necessarily involves an admission
by the offender of material facts comprising the
elements of the offence. Proof
of the fact of the conviction may also constitute evidence of those material
Third, a plea of guilty necessarily means that all relevant defences have been
conceded as not applying. This would preclude the
offender from adducing
evidence in criminal injuries compensation assessment, including for the
purposes of CICA s 41, to the effect
that he or she had a defence to the proved
Fourth, a claimant for criminal injuries compensation cannot re-litigate the
facts which led to the proved offence. This is for two
reasons. The first is
that the basis of the claimant's right to claim criminal injuries compensation
is 'the commission of a proved
offence': CICA s 12(1). The evidence of a 'proved
offence' must reflect the second and third principles. The second reason is that
if the claimant was able to re-litigate the facts which led to the proved
offence by introducing further evidence, procedural fairness
would dictate that
the offender would be entitled to introduce contradictory evidence. This would
lead to the re-litigation of the
facts which led to the proved offence.
Fifth, where there is an issue as to the precise identification of the facts
evidenced by the conviction following a plea of guilty,
the 'only reliable guide
to that issue' will 'usually be' the facts admitted for the purposes of
sentence: Bennett [67]. This will
ordinarily be able to be discerned from the
transcript of the sentencing hearing.
Sixth, a plea of guilty does not constitute an admission of all of the facts
stated in the State's witness statements, or otherwise
contained in the brief.
On the other hand, nor does a plea of guilty constitute a rejection of the facts
stated in the State's witness
statements, or otherwise contained in the brief,
that do not comprise the essential facts necessary to constitute the elements of
the offence. These other facts or circumstances are not incontrovertible.
Seventh, both a claimant and an offender may introduce evidence and other
material in relation to the facts and circumstances not
falling within the
second and third principles. The CICA contains procedures to enable an assessor
to resolve a factual conflict,
including the power to conduct a hearing: CICA s
critical issue in this matter was whether the applicant struck the offender with
the vacuum pole before or after he was stabbed
by the offender. The offender
was charged with unlawful wounding (which does not include an element of
assault) and as such the
defence of provocation under section 246 of the
was not available to him. As such, the timing of when the applicant
struck the offender was therefore not of critical importance
with respect to the
criminal charge. Further, the applicant striking the offender is not a fact
which comprised the elements of
the charge of unlawful wounding and is therefore
a peripheral fact. Proof of the fact of the conviction is not proof of the
striking the offender.
am not bound by peripheral facts which do not go to prove the elements of the
offence with which the offender was charged or which
fall outside any
and am able
to consider additional evidence in relation to when the applicant struck the
offender. To the extent there are peripheral
facts which are relevant to the
resolution of the matter I must determine the facts on the balance of
probabilities.
Additional material considered
obtained a copy of the Electronic Record of Interview of the offender. The
offender was interviewed by police on 21 August 2019.
The offender was
taken by police to St John of God Hospital in Midland for medical review before
being questioned by police. The
offender refused legal representation or an
'interview friend' and advised police of the following circumstances. The
offender paid
$175 per fortnight to the applicant to stay in the house and was
staying there at the applicant's request. He paid on a Thursday
therefore of the understanding he could stay until the next Thursday. He did
not have a key to the property and would usually
enter the house in the company
of the applicant. The offender was not aware he was not able to stay at the
house if he was drunk.
The offender's clothing and other property was stored in
the house. Between one to three days prior to the offence the applicant
said to him you might need to move out when your rent is up but nothing had been
finalised. The applicant had not told the offender
he was no longer welcome to
stay there. The applicant had told the offender's brother he was not welcome
there if drunk but the
offender was not aware of it at the time, advising police
"his brother still sent him on his way there".
offender arrived at the house after drinking all day and was banging on the
windows of the property to get the applicant's attention
when Mr Gibbs came
out of his house. Mr Gibbs allowed the offender use of his telephone to call
the applicant, who advised he was
not at home and was with his ex-girlfriend.
The offender then tried to get into the house, by removing a flyscreen but the
was locked. The offender lay down at the mat at the front door and
attempted to go to sleep. The offender had a knife on him which
had been given
to him by his brother earlier that night. He was unsure why he was given the
knife but assumed it was because he
was drunk and was carrying money on him.
When laying down, he took the knife out of his pocket and had it on the ground
him. The door to the house opened and, whilst still lying down, the
offender was struck to his head by the applicant with a metal
pole, sustaining a
lump to his head. The applicant yelled at the offender for trying to break into
his house. The offender picked
up the knife and went across the road and sat
down near some bushes. He was swearing and yelled out to the applicant: "Why
"F" did you hit me you dumb cunt?". The applicant came running over to him,
saying "what did you call me?". The offender heard
him running, was scared and
stood up. The applicant then hit the offender a second time with the metal
pole, connecting to the left
side of the offender's head. The offender then
lunged at the applicant with the knife and stabbed him. The applicant threw the
pole at him before running away. The offender also ran away and threw the
knife in the toilet of a porta-loo around the corner.
He then realised what he
had done and returned to the scene to wait to be arrested.
offender was straightforward in the account he provided to police, advising he
had been given legal advice not to answer any
questions but he wanted to do so
and to plead guilty as soon as possible as he had put the life of one of his
best mates at risk.
The offender was very straightforward and consistent in his
answers to police and I had no reason not to accept his description
circumstances of the offence.
Police Running Sheet contains a number of entries between 6 September 2019
and 23 September 2019 with respect to arrangements
being made for the
offender to collect his possessions from the applicant's unit, consistent with
the offender's advice in interview
his property was at the applicant's unit.
to section 19 of the Act, on 5 May 2021 the offender was notified of
the application and requested to make submissions with
respect to the
circumstances of the incident and his own personal circumstances with respect to
an ability to refund any monies paid
to the applicant to the State. No response
was received to this correspondence.
6 May 2021 I issued a notice to St John of God Hospital, Midland,
seeking the offender's medical records which were referred to
in his police
interview. The hospital records from St John of God Midland dated
21 October 2019 note the offender was taken there
by police for an
assessment of his fitness to hold him in custody given the head injury sustained
after having been hit to the head
with a pipe by the applicant. The description
of injury noted the offender had been hit to his head twice with a pipe and he
an abrasion to his scalp. No concerns were noted, the offender was given
head injury advice and was discharged into police custody.
These records were
consistent with the applicant's advice to police when interviewed.
17 September 2021 I advised the solicitors of my intent to hold a hearing
in the matter, and a hearing was subsequently listed
for 26 October
Applicant's evidence at hearing
applicant gave evidence on 26 October 2021. He advised he was very anxious
the applicant's evidence below.
applicant had known the offender since school and the offender was living with
the applicant. The day prior to the incident
the applicant and offender had a
bit of an argument at Optus Stadium and had gone their separate ways. The
offender stayed at his
brother's house that night. On the day of the incident
the offender's brother called the applicant to confirm the offender could
with the applicant that night and the applicant advised the offender's brother
he did not want the applicant to stay with him
anymore. The applicant told the
offender's brother he was at his ex-girlfriend's house. The applicant considers
the offender's personality
would change when he was dunk and he would "try to
offender came to the applicant's unit and tried to enter the house, going to the
sliding door and banging on it and removing
the flyscreen from the bedroom
window and trying to open the window. The applicant telephoned Mr Gibbs and
asked him to go outside
and speak to the offender. The offender then used Mr
Gibbs' phone to telephone the applicant who advised he was not home and was
an ex-girlfriend's house. The applicant heard the offender continue to try to
get into the house. The applicant
And then I've just gotten that scared, I went outside and he's – because I
made a noise. I said, "Stop this now," because he
has gone to my window again
and trying to rip it off and I’ve just fully – like, freaked out,
and I'm shaking. And I
remember I couldn't breathe properly, because I was
thinking he was going to smash into the window and, like, do something really
– that's what I thought in my head. Like, it was, kind of, like a horror
movie for me, because I thought – yes. And then
– so I've gone to
approach him and he's pretending to be, like, asleep on the – on the floor
where my sliding door is.
And then I thought to myself – I asked him, "Did
you just try and break into my property?" And he said, "No, no. I've been
sleeping all the time." And I said, “I just heard you taking my flyscreen
off" and everything, and that's when he has
jumped up, because there was a knife
laying right next to him. So he has jumped up with the knife in his hand and
went to lunge at
me with the knife, so that's when I’ve had – I had
a vacuum cleaner pole in my hand already. And then I’ve hit
head with it, only because I was scared he was about to stab me, because he has
actually picked the knife up, saying "I'm
going to fucking kill me – kill
you, bro'." That’s what he said to me. Because we were good mates, you
know, we were
really good mates. But he just always had his moments. Like, even
younger days, there was a lot of disagreements and everything,
and I would
always be the one that end up on the bad end of the stick, you know, because
he's a much bigger guy than me. Like, bigger
build and everything. So I was
quite scared of him.
Right. So you hit him on the head. And what happens after that?---And then he
has gone – ran into the bushes, like, crouching
down into the bushes,
holding a knife in his hand, and just sitting across the road from my property.
And so that meant – that
makes me feel like he's come and attack, you
know, attack me. Like, waiting for me to go to sleep or something, and then
charge into
my house when I'm sleeping. So I thought to myself, I don't want
that happening. Like, opened my sliding door, went back outside
again and asked
him, "Can you please leave the property?" Like, "I don’t want you here."
And then that's when I’ve got
– he has jumped out of the bushes,
lunged at me and just gone – I thought it was only one stab, but then I
injury and it's actually two, because I couldn’t even remember
getting stabbed. I just looked down and I just went like this.
I went, "What the
– what the fuck have you done, man." All this blood just coming out, and
it was, like, gushing out. And then
I freaked out and I've actually managed to
hit him a second time with the vacuum cleaner, and it slipped out of my hand,
I've gone – ran inside, all blood everywhere.
applicant attended Royal Perth Hospital but was concerned the offender would
attack him again so left the hospital to go home.
He was apprehended and
returned to the hospital but only stayed there for a short period of time
despite needing to stay longer.
He was in considerable pain and had to lay in
bed for a week or so before he was able to walk properly. He was unable to
as doing so hurt his stomach "really bad". He suffered from nightmares
and was unable to sleep "hardly ever" and was put on a lot
of medications for
applicant advised his staples were supposed to be removed within two weeks but
were left in place for four weeks as he was unable
to go to the doctors himself
due to his pain
applicant advised whilst the offender was his "best mate" the offender had a
history of assaulting him. He did not call the
police when the offender was
trying to break into the house as he was worried the offender would hear him do
so. However, he wasn't
concerned the offender would hear him on the phone to
Mr Gibbs as he was "really quiet". He asked Mr Gibbs to phone the
Before going out to confront the offender he dismantled the vacuum
cleaner to remove the pole from it. When he opened the door
to confront the
offender, the offender jumped up and tried to stab him and that is why he struck
him with the pole.
The offender was pretending to be asleep when he was laying at the front
the offender walked across the road the applicant didn’t call police,
And you can see him sitting in a bush at the front of the house opposite and you
know he has a knife?---Yes.
And you didn't call the police then?---No, Miss. Why not?---Because I was
scared. I didn't want to get attacked or anything, and
I thought if I call
police, they're going to take about five minutes, 10 minutes more to get to the
property. So I’m trying
to get him away myself.
All right. So when you walked across the road to him - - -?---Yes. - - - you had
the pipe in your hand?---Yes. And what was your
intention when you went across
the road?---To – I told him to move on. That’s what I said. Move on.
And why did you have the pipe in your hand?---Because he had a knife in his
So what were you going to do with the pipe?---Well – because I didn't want
to get stabbed, so what am I going to walk over
there with just nothing in my
hand and – like, I was trying to whack it out of his hand. That's my
intention to do. But I struck
him in the head instead and I was actually trying
to go for his hand. And that was my intention, Miss, to get the knife out,
him so he doesn't have a knife. And then call police, Miss.
So you went across there - - -?---So I was trying to, like, sort it out myself,
basically, but it didn’t end that way.
Yes. All right. So just so I'm understanding. So you’ve gone across the
road with the pipe in your hand?---Yes.
And your intention is to sort the situation out yourself?---Yes. So you
don’t need to call police?---Yes.
And you have the intention of striking him on the hand with the pipe?---That was
my intention. Yes.
So he couldn’t stab you?---Yes. But it didn’t end like that. I got
stabbed anyway.
applicant advised Mr Gibbs was inside the house and did not witness any of
the assaults, despite the applicant screaming for
the conclusion of the hearing of the applicant's evidence, Mr Hornigold,
who appeared as counsel for the applicant made a submission
with respect to the
applicant's conduct. He submitted the situation was the offender was trying to
break into the applicant's unit
and when confronted threatened to stab the
applicant who then struck the offender once, lightly, in self-defence. The
continued the applicant was genuinely fearful of the offender and
acted reasonably in going across the road to speak to the offender
to tell him
heard the applicant give evidence and having reviewed his medical records, I
find the applicant exaggerated the impact of
his injuries with respect to the
extent of his debilitation immediately after the incident and the treatment he
received. For example,
he stated he was unable to attend the doctor to have the
staples removed for four weeks after the incident due to his pain levels
incapacity. However, the applicant attended St John of God Hospital,
Midland on 23 August 2019 and 29 August 2019. He attended
his general
practitioner on 24 August 2019 and 27 August 2019. He had his staples
removed on 1 September 2019 (being 12 days after
the incident) and
attended Royal Perth Hospital on 5 September 2019 for a review of his
wound. I did not accept the applicant's evidence
he discharged against medical
advice because he was scared of the offender. The Royal Perth Hospital records
make it clear the applicant
left the hospital as he was not prescribed
medication he requested. Consistent with this, upon leaving the hospital the
"took all of his pain
concerns about a potential drug overdose on his readmission. Whilst the passage
of time since the incident may have caused
the applicant to be somewhat
imprecise in his recall, his evidence is self-serving in its exaggeration of the
impact of the injury
and fear of the offender and raises concerns with respect
to the credibility of the applicant's evidence.
Offender's evidence at hearing
offender gave evidence on 7 December 2021. I set out the offender's
evidence below.
offender said he had known the applicant since he was 15 years and they
were like brothers. The offender confirmed he'd had
a number of previous
altercations with the applicant, giving examples where the applicant smoked the
last cone, leading to a fight
and another where they had a fight over a beer and
offender categorised the relationship as a sibling relationship where they were
"just two blokes ... always butting
offender had an argument with one of the applicant's friends on 19 August
2019 at Optus Stadium and did not return to the applicant's
unit until the
following day.
offender was staying at the applicant's unit and was paying between $150 to $200
per fortnight in rent. He was sleeping on the
couch and had been doing so for
He knocked on the door but no one answered. Mr
Gibbs, who lived in the adjoining property heard the knocking and came out to
what was going on. He borrowed a phone from Mr Gibbs and called the
applicant. The applicant told him he was in Mandurah visiting
his girlfriend
and the offender advised he would sleep outside. The offender then decided he
would try to get in the house through
a window if he could. The offender was
unaware the applicant was in the house. He took the flyscreen off the bathroom
window, but
the window was locked. He then tried to take the flyscreen off the
bedroom window but thought it would break and so put it back
on. The offender
then lay down at the front door. He took the knife he had on him out of the
front pocket of his jumper as he didn't
want to sleep on it and placed it on the
ground in front of him. The offender pillowed his head on his arms in front of
fell asleep. He woke to a noise. He turned his head and looked and saw
the applicant had opened the door. The applicant struck
the offender with a
vacuum pole, hitting him to the back of his head and causing pain. The blow was
struck to the back of his head
before the offender was able to stand up. The
applicant was swearing at the offender and threatening to hit him again. The
ran across the street and swore at the applicant and called him a dog,
asking why he hit him. The applicant came running over.
The offender stood up.
The applicant hit the offender a second time. The offender pulled out a knife
and stabbed the
offender expanded on his discussion with the applicant at the front door of the
And then – so he hits you, and what do you say to him?---What the heck was
that for? And I just grabbed my head and, like,
why would you do that.
Yes?---Yes. And he’s, like, you're trying to break into my house. And I
said, well, you said you weren't home, like, what,
you expect me to sleep
outside all night. I'm hungry. Because I was drinking all day and I just wanted
to go lay down, have a feed.
And I think – I think the reason he didn't
want me to come inside was because I was intoxicated and, like, we have had
altercations
in the past whilst I've been drunk. But that's not the case,
because that night, you know, I just wanted to come home. Maybe buy
off of him and – and get stoned and have something to eat and go to
And so was there anything more to that altercation before you got up and went
across the road?---No. Just as I said, he was standing
over me, threatening to
hit me again.
Did you grab the knife?---Yes. I grabbed the knife, put it in my pocket, got up
and ran across the
offender was unclear as to whether he threatened the applicant with the knife at
the front door of the house, stating:
Did you threaten him with the knife at the time?---I don’t believe I did.
No. My Dad says that I said that in my statement
to the police, but I – I
do not recall saying it. I could have but I don’t – I don’t
I have set out the offender's interview to police at [25] to [26] above, and
note he made no admission of threatening the applicant
with the knife at the
door of the house.
respect to the actual offence, the offender stated in more
And so then you've gone across the road – so this is a small suburban
street, is it?---Yes. Yes. So, like, his front door just
looked across the road.
I ran over that – just adjacent, like, it was the other side, and I sat
next to a bush and I crouched
down against the fence and I was holding my head,
because it was still hurting and – yes, I yelled out, like, why the eff
you do that, man, like, you know, he knew it was me, you know. Then I
called him a dog, because I know he doesn’t like that,
and then I heard
him come running over.
Did you threaten him?---No. I don’t believe I did.
Because I heard him come running over. Like, he was barefoot and I heard the
thudding on the ground, so I didn’t want to be
sitting down, vulnerable,
again. So I stood up and he hit me and I pulled the knife out and he seen it. I
took it out of its case
and he said, "You won't do it," and then I just –
yes – I don’t know why. I just stepped forward and I stabbed
Okay. So when he hit you, what hand was the – do you recall what hand he
was holding the baton?---He was holding with two hands.
Two hands?---Yes. Then he came down like that and hit me in the front of the
And when you stabbed him, that was after he hit you?---Yes.
All right. Now, Mitchell's evidence was that you stabbed him and then he hit
you?---No. I don't recall that. I remember getting hit,
and then I pulled it
out. He said I wouldn’t do it and then I stabbed him.
Yes. And after you stabbed him, what did he do?---He dropped his weapon and he
grabbed his stomach. He looked down and he looked
at me and then he said,
"You’re going down," and then he ran inside and I was freaking out, like,
what did I just do. And yes.
I left the scene and then I freaked out and I was,
like, is he okay and I ended up coming back, but there was no activity at the
house so I was in his neighbour's backyard when the police got
respect to the offender's entitlement to be at the property, his evidence was he
paid rent, was sleeping on the couch and had
unpacked his possessions placing
them in a linen cupboard the applicant had cleared out for him and had a
separate shelf for his
toiletries.
applicant had not given the offender a key to the property and the offender
accessed the property in company with the applicant
as they were always
offender denied the applicant had told him he was no longer welcome to live with
The offender
advised he overheard his brother's conversation with the applicant, only hearing
his brother's comment the offender
had stopped drinking and was sobering
The offender
was clearly aware at some point the applicant had told his brother he was not
welcome at the house if he was drunk
but the timing of this knowledge is
unclear. In any event, the offender was of the view he had sobered up when he
returned to the
applicant's unit as he hadn't had anything to drink since
leaving Parkwood at about 7.30 pm or
offender was asked about his knowledge of the applicant's possession of illicit
drugs when the offence occurred. The offender
said the applicant would always
have "weed" on him and assumed he would have some on him at the
there would
have been "THC" in the applicant's coffee grinder in the
the applicant and offender had a bong in the premises.
advised the applicant's counsel I was not prepared to make a finding the
applicant was in possession of marijuana based solely
on the offender's evidence
he "assumed" the applicant would have been in possession of
subsequent to the hearing I drew to the applicant's attention the Police
Incident Report listed a glass bong and plant
material which was identified as
cannabis. On 7 January 2022 the applicant's solicitor advised by way of
correspondence it was the
applicant's position the cannabis and bong belonged to
the offender.
offender advised he had a head injury from "shaken baby syndrome" and had
difficulties with learning and
offender was inconsistent in his evidence on few matters, compared to his police
interview. He stated he took the knife from
his brother's girlfriends house as
if was "a wicked knife, good for chopping
than to protect himself from potential threats. The offender also expressed
considerable confusion the applicant had been
stabbed twice, as his recollection
was he had stabbed the applicant only
these issues I found the offender to be consistent in his evidence and preferred
his evidence to that of the applicant.
Standard of proof
of the Act provides that 'satisfied' means 'satisfied on the balance of
probabilities'.
evidence must be scrutinised with care and caution in determining whether the
offending occurred, but also having regard to the
remedial purpose of the Act
which provides a right to compensation:
[2017] WADC 92
Findings of fact
considered the evidence and the standard of proof required, I make the following
findings of fact:
In August 2019,
the offender was staying at the applicant's unit in exchange for a payment of
between $150 to $200 per fortnight.
As at 20 August 2019 the offender had
been staying with the applicant for a number of weeks, but less than one month.
The offender's
possessions were in the applicant's
offender did not have a key to the applicant's unit and had always entered the
house in the company of the applicant;
19 August 2019 the offender had an argument with one of the applicant's
friends. Despite that, and the applicant and offender
going separate ways, they
saw each other at the train station later that day and everything was OK between
20 August 2019 the applicant formed a view the offender was no longer
welcome to stay with him. The applicant did not directly
inform the offender he
was not able to stay at the applicant's
The offender
was not aware he was no longer able to stay with the
The offender
travelled to the applicant's unit on the night of 20 August 2019. He had
been drinking most of the day, but had stopped
drinking about 7.30 pm or
8.00 pm. He had a knife in his possession.
When he arrived
at the applicant's unit, the offender knocked on the front door. The applicant,
who was home, did not answer the
who lived in the adjacent property heard the offender knocking and asked him
what was happening. The offender advised he
was trying to get in. The lights
at the applicant's unit were turned off. The offender advised he would sleep
The offender
attempted to enter the applicant's unit via the bathroom window by removing the
flyscreen but the window was locked.
He then attempted to remove the flyscreen
from the bedroom window, but was concerned he would damage it so ceased his
enter that way.
The applicant
telephoned Mr Gibbs, and advised him the offender was trying to break in
and asked him to call the police. Mr Gibbs
did not do so.
lent his phone to the offender so he could call the applicant. The applicant
advised the offender he was not at home.
The offender
returned to the front door, and after removing the knife from his front pocket,
lay down with his head cradled in his
arms and attempted to go to sleep.
The applicant
dismantled the vacuum cleaner and held the vacuum cleaner pole in his hand when
he opened the door to confront the
applicant was unaware when he armed himself with the vacuum cleaner pole that
the offender had a knife.
The offender was
roused by the applicant, who opened the door and struck the offender to the back
of his head with a vacuum cleaner
pole. Whilst the offender's knife could
clearly be seen by the applicant, it was on ground in front of the offender. The
did not have the knife in his hand when he was struck by the applicant
on this first occasion.
The applicant
asked the offender why he had been attempting to break in and advised the
offender he was not welcome at the
After being
struck, the offender ran across the road and crouched near some bushes. He
swore at the applicant and called him names.
The applicant
ran across the road towards the offender, carrying the vacuum cleaner pole. The
applicant had the intention of striking
the offender, to knock the knife out of
his hand and also to tell him to go away.
The offender
stood to meet the applicant. The applicant intended to strike the offender to
his hand but struck the offender to the
front of his head a second time with the
vacuum pole instead.
The offender
held out the knife. The applicant said to the offender "You won't do it". The
offender stepped forward and stabbed the
applicant to his abdomen with the
The applicant
dropped the vacuum cleaner pole and ran back towards his house.
The applicant
sustained two stab wounds to his abdomen, one of which caused a grade II liver
laceration, and subsequently developed
post-traumatic stress disorder and an
exacerbation of his pre-existing anxiety.
At the time of
the offence there was a small amount of cannabis and a bong in the applicant's
unit. I am not satisfied to the requisite
standard these items belonged to the
Were the applicant's actions justified in defence of his home?
applicant submitted the offender was attempting to break into the applicant's
unit and the applicant's actions in striking the
offender at the doorstep and
then following him across the road and striking him again were reasonable steps
for any home occupier
to take to preserve his property. Section 254 of the
permits a person who is in peaceable possession of a place to use such
force as is reasonably necessary to prevent a person from wrongfully
the place or to remove a person who wrongfully remains on or in the place.
difficulty with this submission from the applicant is the offender was residing
with the applicant, having been staying with
him for some weeks, with his
belongings in the applicant's unit and the offender having paid money to the
applicant to stay there
in an informal agreement. The offender was, in effect,
a lodger with the applicant. Whilst the applicant was entitled to cease
agreement at any time, he was required to communicate cessation of the agreement
to the offender and give the offender reasonable
time to collect his belongings.
The last direct communication between the applicant and offender was the day
prior to the incident
at which time, on the applicant's evidence, "everything
was OK between them". I am not satisfied the applicant contacted the offender
and advised he was no longer welcome to lodge with the applicant prior to the
offence. Whilst there was a telephone call between
the applicant and the
offender's brother in relation to the offender being unwelcome to stay there if
drunk, there was no clear and
direct communication from the applicant to the
offender prior to the offence occurring that the lodging relationship was
terminated.
At no time on 20 August 2018, whilst the offender was attempting to
access the house did the applicant tell him he was no longer
welcome to stay
there. When the offender telephoned the applicant using Mr Gibb's phone the
applicant told the offender he was not
at the premises. The offender told the
applicant he would sleep
applicant went outside and spoke to the offender he asked him why he was
attempting to break
It was only
after striking the offender, the applicant advised him he could no longer stay
offender then left the premises, running across the road.
applicant submitted the offender not having a key to the premises was a clear
indicator he was not entitled to reside there.
The applicant was not asked
applicant confirmed there
was a verbal agreement between the applicant and the
offender the offender could stay there. The offender's evidence was he did
have a key to the premises as they had not gotten around to it yet, and he was
always with the applicant. I do not consider
the offender not having been given
a key to the premises as determinative of any entitlement to reside at the
circumstances where the offender was entitled to be at the premises, the
applicant was not justified in using force to remove
him from the premises.
Further, in circumstances where the offender is at the property at which he
resides and has been told by the
applicant (who has the key the offender relied
upon to access the property) he is not home it is not unreasonable for the
to check the windows in an attempt to gain entry, as he
Did the applicant commit an offence sufficient to preclude him
compensation?
Section 39(1)
of the Act provides:
If an assessor is satisfied –
(a) that a person was injured as a consequence of the commission of an offence;
(b) that the injury was suffered when the person was committing a separate
the assessor must not make a compensation award in favour of the
Attorney General for Western Australia v Her Honour Judge
the Court of Appeal said:
I agree with respect that s 39(1) does not require any causal connection between
the injuries suffered by the appellant and the separate
offence allegedly being
committed by the appellant. The only relationship is a temporal one. No award
can be made if the injury was
suffered when the appellant was committing a
separate offence. The appellant contends for a narrow interpretation of the
connection so that if the separate offence is committed before the
offence causing injury, the appellant could nonetheless receive
an award of
compensation. The Amicus contends that too narrow an interpretation of the
temporal limitation could defeat the purpose
of this section. On the other hand
too broad an interpretation would bar a victim of crime from obtaining
compensation in an otherwise
appropriate case. Whether there is a temporal
connection requires judgment by the Assessor of all the facts and circumstances
the case to determine whether at the time the applicant was injured the
applicant was committing a separate offence. Generally, if
the applicant's
injury and the applicant's offence are part of the one incident, that would be
sufficient to show a temporal connection.
find the applicant assaulted the offender on two separate occasions, firstly by
striking him with the vacuum cleaner pole outside
the door of the premises (the
first assault by the applicant), and then by striking him with the vacuum
cleaner pole a second time
when the applicant and offender engaged again across
the road (the second assault). Both of these assaults by the applicant caused
the offender to sustain contusions on his head. I find the first assault by the
applicant and the second assault by the applicant
each comprise separate
offences of assault occasioning bodily harm pursuant to section 317 of the
question is then raised whether these assaults were unlawful. An assault is
unlawful unless it was justified or excused at
justification could be self-defence or provocation. The law relating to
self-defence is contained in section 248 of the
CC which provides that a
harmful act done by a person is lawful if the act is done in self-defence.
Section 248(4) provides a person's
harmful act is done in self-defence if:
(a) the person believes the act is necessary to defend the person
or another person from a harmful act, including a harmful act that
imminent; and
(b) the person's harmful act is a reasonable response by the person in the
circumstances as the person believes them to be; and
(c) there are reasonable grounds for those beliefs.
applicant submitted the first assault by the applicant was in defence of himself
and his home. I have found at [58], above,
the offender was entitled to be at
the premises. With respect to defence of his person, the applicant's evidence
was the offender
"jumped up with the knife in his hand and went to lunge at me
with the knife"
and so he struck him in self-defence. The offender was struck to the back of
his head by the applicant. I cannot reconcile a blow
to the back of the
offender's head (which is consistent with the offender lying on the ground when
struck) with the applicant's evidence
he hit the offender in self-defence as the
offender was lunging at him. The applicant armed himself prior to being aware
the offender
was in possession of a knife. I do not accept the first assault by
the applicant was in self-defence.
applicant submitted the second assault by the applicant was also in
self-defence, in circumstance where the applicant described
a genuine fear the
offender would return to the house and attempt to break in and harm him. The
applicant's evidence was when he
went across the road he had the intention of
striking the offender with the vacuum cleaner pole:
And what was your intention when you went across the road?---To – I told
him to move on. That’s what I said. Move on.
And why did you have the pipe in your hand?---Because he had a knife in his
So what were you going to do with the pipe?---Well – because I
didn’t want to get stabbed, so what am I going to walk
over there with
just nothing in my hand and – like, I was trying to whack it out of his
hand. That's my intention to do. But
I struck him in the head instead and I was
actually trying to go for his hand. And that was my intention, Miss, to get the
out, dismantle him so he doesn’t have a knife. And then call police,
applicant crossed the road to confront the offender with the intent of striking
him with the pole. Prior to crossing the road
the applicant was not in any
immediate danger from the offender, and the applicant's unit was not in any
immediate danger from the
offender. To establish a defence of self-defence with
respect to the second assault by the applicant, the applicant must establish
held a belief it was necessary to strike the offender to defend himself from a
harmful act (which was not imminent), that striking
the offender was a
reasonable response in the circumstances believed by the applicant and there are
reasonable grounds for those
harmful act feared by the applicant was the offender would break into his home
at a later time when the applicant was sleeping
In support of
the reasonableness of the applicant's belief is the offender was at that stage
known by the applicant to have a knife
and the applicant and offender had
previously had a number of altercations during the course of their friendship.
The applicant
also alleges the offender had already threatened him with the
knife, however I found the applicant was not at that time threatened
offender with a knife. On the other hand there was also evidence the offender
and applicant had been on good terms, the offender
left the property after the
offender assaulted him and told him to leave and the offender had previously
been unable to enter the
premises, despite attempting to do so. The applicant
had retreated to the premises and by all accounts was safe inside. He had
telephone and could have contacted Mr Gibbs and/or the police and chose not
to do so. The applicant had options available to him
to stay safe but chose
instead to put himself at risk by crossing the road to confront the offender
whom he knew was probably intoxicated
and had a knife. This in effect was a
poor choice.
balance, I do not accept the second assault by the applicant was in
self-defence.
have also considered whether the offender provoked the second attack by the
applicant. In this regard the offender's evidence
was he called an applicant a
"dog" as he knew he wouldn't like
Section 246
of the CC provides a person is not criminally responsible for an assault
committed upon a person who gives him provocation
for the assault, if he is in
fact deprived by the provocation of the power of self-control, and acts upon it
on the sudden and before
there is time for his passion to cool; provided the
force used is not disproportionate to the provocation, and is not intended, and
is not such as is likely to cause death or grievous bodily harm. The term
"provocation" is defined section 245 of the CC. So far
as is relevant for
present purposes, that section provides as follows:
"The term '
provocation'
used with reference to an offence of which
an assault is an element, means and includes, except as hereinafter stated,
any wrongful act or insult of such a nature as to be likely
, when done to
an ordinary person, or in the presence of an ordinary person to another person
who is under his immediate care, or
to whom he stands in a conjugal, parental,
filial, or fraternal relation, or in the relation of master or servant,
deprive him of the power of self control, and to induce him to assault the
person by whom the act or insult is done or offered
." (emphasis
Masciantonio v The
[1995] HCA 67
(1995) 183 CLR 58
Brennan, Deane, Dawson and Gaudron JJ
The provocation must be such that it is capable of causing an ordinary person to
lose self-control and to act in the way in which
the accused did. The
provocation must actually cause the accused to lose self-control and the accused
must act while deprived of
self-control before he has had the opportunity to
regain his composure.
applicant's evidence (set out at [64], above) he went across the road to strike
the offender and disarm him, indicates a deliberate
decision to take action
against the offender and is not consistent with the applicant having been
deprived of the power of self-control.
I find the defence of provocation does
not apply to the second assault by the applicant.
next question raised is whether the applicant was injured when these separate
offences by the applicant occurred. The temporal
connection between the
separate offences committed by the applicant and the offence causing injury is
not to be interpreted on a
narrow basis and they do no need to have been
committed in the same instance in
Consideration must be had to whether the applicant's separate offence(s) and his
injuries are part of the one
first assault by the applicant upon the offender occurred at the applicant's
unit a short time prior to the applicant being stabbed.
I received no direct
evidence in relation to the time that lapsed between the first assault by the
applicant and the stabbing.
I estimate the time lapsed, which was sufficient
for the offender to cross the road, huddle in the bushes and yell at the
and for the applicant to run across the road and confront the
offender was less than five minutes. Mr Gibbs said the time lapse
hearing the applicant and offender argue and the applicant seeking his
assistance after being injured was about 10 minutes.
The applicant's
evidence he chose to confront the applicant because it would be quicker than
waiting for police who would take 5-10
minutes to reach the
consistent with the second assault occurring less than five minutes after the
first assault. In
[2017] WADC 168
Davis DCJ found two
assaults involving the applicant which occurred in different locations (one
being inside and one outside of a
tavern) and less than 15 minutes apart
were separate and distinct incidents, noting there had been a physical
separation between
the parties, they were at separate locations in the venue and
with a time lapse between the two incidents. In this application,
between the
first assault by the applicant and the injury there was an ongoing engagement
between the applicant and offender (with
the offender continuing to yell at the
applicant after retreating across the road), a short period of time and a short
distance with
the parties being visible to each other the entire time. I find
the first assault by the applicant was part of the same incident
in which he was
second assault by the applicant occurred immediately prior to him being stabbed
by the offender. I find the second assault by
the applicant was part of the
same incident in which he was injured.
am therefore satisfied when the applicant was injured he was committing separate
offences and is disentitled to an award of compensation
Did the behaviour, condition, attitude or disposition of the applicant
contribute, directly or indirectly, to his injuries?
my findings in relation to section 39 make further consideration of the
barriers to the applicant receiving compensation redundant,
for the sake of
completeness I also address section 41 of the Act which provides:
Behaviour etc. of victim to be considered
In deciding whether or not to make a compensation award, or the amount of a
compensation award, in favour of a victim, or a close
relative of a deceased
victim, an assessor –
(a) must have regard to any behaviour, condition, attitude, or disposition of
the victim that contributed, directly or indirectly,
to the victim's injury or
(b) may, if he or she thinks it is just to do so –
(i) refuse to make a compensation award because of
that contribution; or
(ii) reduce the amount that the assessor would otherwise have awarded.
[2001] WADC 86
, Schoombee DCJ held:
The purpose of section 41 of the Act is to apportion responsibility to the
applicant for his or her behaviour, condition (in the
sense of mental
disposition) attitude or disposition (in the sense of frame of mind or mood),
which contributed to the offence and
therefore to the injury'
considering any contribution by an applicant's behaviour, the relevant
principles are as follows:
(a) Section 41 requires a two-step
process, firstly to determine whether the applicant contributed to his or her
injuries, and if
so, secondly to determine if it is just to reduce or refuse the
(b) "Contribution" requires more than a chronological connection, there must
be some quality about the behaviour that is
(c) There must be a causal nexus between the applicant's conduct and the
(d) The issue of whether the victim has contributed to the injuries sustained
is a question of fact to be considered in the context
of the circumstances of
(e) There will be no contributory behaviour where the incident giving rise to
the offence is precipitated by the offender and the
reaction of the victim to
that should be of no surprise to the offender. There will be contributory
behaviour where the incident
is precipitated by the
(f) The use of words 'if he or she thinks it is just to do so' required the
Court to consider all the circumstances and to make a
judgment ensuring that
justice if done in this case. It is a discretion and must be exercised
according to law, taking account of
the purpose of the legislation and the
requirements of the
have found the applicant struck the first blow upon the offender at the door of
his house, and then ran across the road and struck
him a second time. The
applicant was the aggressor in relation to both the first and the second
assaults by the applicant. The
applicant's behaviour in confronting the
offender, and choosing not to call the police or seeking additional assistance
from Mr Gibbs
or staying safely locked inside his home despite the offender
not having been able to enter the premises earlier precipitated the
applicant submitted his actions were those of a reasonable man who was in fear
of his life, and in fear of the offender breaking
into the home whilst he was
sleeping and killing
applicant armed himself with the vacuum cleaner pole prior to opening the front
door and seeing the offender had a knife. He
then struck the offender to the
back of the head, whilst the offender was lying on the ground. The offender had
made no threats
towards the applicant prior to this occurring. The offender had
attempted to enter the house in which he was lodging in circumstances
applicant had told him he was not at home. In
Saric v Duric
[2021] WADC 53
the offender alleged he assaulted the applicant because the
applicant had made threats of violence during a "friendly" soccer match.
Gething DCJ observed at [86] it was utterly disingenuous for the offender to
assert he was so concerned about an act of threatened
violence so as to be
morally justified in responding with a grossly disproportionate act of actual
violence. In this matter, the
applicant is attempting to justify his attack
upon the offender by alleging his friend, with whom he was usually on good terms
who he had not advised was not welcome to stay on the premises, was
attempting to break into the house and cause him harm. I do
not accept that
submission. The applicant's behaviour in assaulting the offender on two
separate occasions contributed directly
to him sustaining injury. In effect the
applicant precipitated the events which lead to his injury. He made poor
choices. In all
the circumstances I find it just to refuse to make a
compensation award.
Accordingly,
I now refuse the application for compensation.
I certify that the preceding paragraph(s)
comprise the reasons for decision of the Criminal Injuries Compensation Assessor
K Hafford, ASSESSOR OF CRIMINAL INJURIES COMPENSATION
18 MAY 2022
Applicant's
statement dated 31/8/19 at
Inpatient case notes 21/8/19,
Inpatient notes 21/08/19, 11:30 and Behaviour Assessment dated
Midland, Adult Emergency Department record
Transcript of proceedings, Magistrates Court, Midland JO 9313 of 2019 and JO
56748 of 2019, 13/12/19, page
Underwood v Underwood
[2018] WADC 13
[55] - [62]. Gething
Bennetts v Smith
[2022] WADC 32.
[38] Gillian
McDavitt v McDavitt
[2013] WADC 22
26/10/21 page
26/10/21 page
26/10/21 page
Transcript 26/10/21 page
26/10/21 page
26/10/21 page
26/10/21 page
26/10/21 page
Transcript 26/10/21 page
perth Hospital Adult Triage Nursing Assessment 21/08/19
Transcript 07/12/21 pages
Transcript 07/12/21 page
07/12/21 page
07/12/21 pages 3-5, 21, 30,
07/12/21 page
07/12/21 page
07/12/21 page
07/12/21 pages
Transcript 07/12/21 pages
Transcript 07/12/21 page
07/12/21 pages 23, 24,
07/12/21 page
07/12/21 pages 27 and
07/12/21 page
07/12/21 page
Transcript 07/12/21 page
07/12/21 page
07/12/21 page
07/12/21 page
07/12/21 pages 12-14,
of offender - Transcript 07/12/21 pages
Evidence of applicant - Transcript 26/10/21 page 5; Evidence of offender -
Transcript 07/12/21 page
of applicant - Transcript 26/10/21 page
Evidence of
offender - Transcript 07/12/21 pages 23, 24,
of applicant – transcript 26/10/21 pages 6 and
of applicant – transcript 26/10/21 page
of offender, Transcript 07/12/21, page
Evidence of
applicant, Transcript 26/10/21, page
of applicant – transcript 26/10/21 page
Attorney General for Western Australia v Her Honour Judge
[2012] WASCA
Criminal Code
of applicant, Transcript 26/10/21 at page
Evidence of
applicant, Transcript 26/10/21 at
of applicant, Transcript 26/10/21 page
Evidence of
offender, Transcript 07/12/21 page
Attorney General v Schoombee
[53], [54];
[2013] WADC 22
McDavitt v McDavitt
Hutchings v Lachlan
Evidence of applicant, Transcript 26/10/21 at
Bodney v Assessor of Compensation
(2000) 24 SR (WA) 299
[2017] WACIC 10
Commonwealth v Pillifeant
unreported; SCt of ACT; 28 November
1990, Miles CJ, at
[2013] WACIC 3.
Error! Bookmark not
Bodney v Assessor of Compensation
(2000) 23 SR (WA) 299
Layton v Northern Territory of Australia & Ano
Bull v Hobbs
[2009] WADC 128
Re Richardson
[2009] WADC 93
Transcript 26/10/21 pages 25-6.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (458 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter