URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WASCA/2025/163.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:08:12
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
HOWARTH -v- THE STATE OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA [2025] WASCA 163 (7 November 2025)
COURT OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
THE COURT OF APPEAL
-v- THE STATE OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
[2025] WASCA 163
DELIVERED :
NOVEMBER 2025
CACR 119 of 2024
JAMES HOWARTH
STATE OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
COURT OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
IND 2092 of 2023
law - Appeal against sentence - One count of possessing money that was the
proceeds of an offence contrary to s 563A(1)(b)
Criminal Code
- One count of possessing cocaine with
intent to sell or supply it to another contrary to
Misuse of Drugs Act
- Where offender is already serving
a sentence of imprisonment for a previous offence - Whether the total effective
sentence infringes
the first limb of the totality principle
Legislation:
of Drugs Act 1981
to appeal granted
resentenced
Representation:
B B Sertorio SC
Solicitors:
Kingdom Legal
Director of Public
Prosecutions (WA)
referred to in decision(s):
OF THE COURT
is an offender appeal against sentence.
23 May 2024 the appellant was convicted, on his pleas of guilty, of two
offences. The offences were
appellant possessed money, some $78,450, that was the proceeds of an offence,
namely, the sale or supply of prohibited drugs,
contrary to s 563A(1)(b) of
Criminal Code
(WA) (Code)
appellant had in his possession a prohibited drug, namely 998 g of cocaine,
with intent to sell or supply it to another, contrary
Misuse of Drugs Act 1981
maximum penalties for the appellant's offending are 20 years' imprisonment
(as to count 1) and one or both of a fine of $100,000
or 25 years'
imprisonment (as to count 2).
appellant was sentenced in the District Court of Western Australia by
Barbagallo DCJ on 24 May 2024. The appellant was sentenced
2 years' immediate imprisonment for the offending the subject of
count 1 (the possession of money that was the proceeds of drug
dealing) and
8 years' immediate imprisonment for the offending the subject of
count 2 (the possession of prohibited drugs with intent
to sell or supply).
The sentencing judge ordered that the two terms of imprisonment were to be
served cumulatively. Accordingly,
the total effective sentence for the two
offences was 10 years' immediate imprisonment. The sentencing judge made
an order that
the appellant be eligible for parole (having previously made a
drug trafficker declaration).
appellant was a serving prisoner when he was sentenced on 24 May 2024. The
offences the subject of counts 1 and 2 were committed
appellant was on parole. In October 2017 the appellant was sentenced by
Jenkins J in the Supreme Court of Western Australia
to a total effective
sentence of 9 years' imprisonment. He was released on parole on
27 October 2022. The appellant was arrested
for the offending the subject
of counts 1 and 2 on 29 June 2023 (ie some 8 months after
his release into the community on parole).
The appellant's parole was suspended
the following day and subsequently cancelled.
the time the appellant was sentenced for the offending the subject of
counts 1 and 2 he was continuing to serve the remainder
sentence imposed by Jenkins J. The sentence completion date was
27 October 2024. The sentencing judge ordered that the 10‑year
effective sentence for the offending the subject of counts 1 and 2 would
commence on 28 October 2024 ‑ ie after the expiration
of the earlier sentence imposed by Jenkins J. Accordingly, in substance
the 10‑year total effective sentence was to be served
cumulatively on the
completion of the 16 months in prison that the appellant was serving
following the suspension and subsequent
cancellation of his parole in respect of
the sentence imposed by Jenkins J.
appellant does not challenge either of the individual sentences the subject of
counts 1 or 2. There is a single ground of appeal.
Shorn of particulars
it provides:
The learned sentencing judge erred in law by imposing a total effective sentence
that infringed the first limb of the totality principle.
appellant requires an extension of time to appeal. The delay in commencing the
appeal, of some five months, is adequately explained
by affidavit and the
extension of time is not opposed by the State. Where, as will be seen, the
appeal has merit, there should be
an extension of time to appeal. Otherwise,
for the reasons that follow, there should be leave to appeal on the single
appeal and the appeal should be allowed. The appellant should be
resentenced to a total effective sentence of 9 years' imprisonment
backdated to commence from 30 June 2023.
The circumstances of the offending
June 2023 the appellant was identified as a person of interest in a police
investigation into a drug syndicate involved in the
sale and supply of illicit
drugs in the Perth metropolitan area.
29 June 2023 the police executed a search warrant at the appellant's
residence. The appellant was arrested on suspicion of property
laundering and
the house was searched. The police located $65,000 in cash in a backpack next
to the appellant's bed. A further
$13,450 in cash was located inside a grey
jumper in a wardrobe in the appellant's bedroom. The money was the proceeds of
of drugs. $15,000 of the money was identified as money that had been
used by an undercover covert operative to purchase 1 kg of
MDMA from the
original target of the police investigation.
further search of the wardrobe in the appellant's bedroom located a suit bag
containing a vacuum sealed bag in which there was
998 g of cocaine. The
cocaine was later determined to have a purity of 55%. Also located in the
items that were indicia of the appellant
engaging in drug dealing activities. The appellant was charged with the
offences the subject
of counts 1 and 2. Bail was refused.
appellant was sentenced on the basis that he was a mid‑level drug dealer
in a wider drug syndicate and that he received
significant financial benefit for
his role in the routine distribution of large quantities of prohibited drugs and
cash as directed
by others in the syndicate (ts 33,
The appellant's personal circumstances
appellant was 34 years of age at the time he committed the offences the
subject of counts 1 and 2 and 35 years of age when he
appellant was born in Queensland and relocated to Western Australia in his early
childhood after his parents separated. He was
one of three children born to his
mother and father. The appellant was raised by his mother and had a positive
and stable upbringing.
His family environment encouraged pro‑social and
Christian values. The appellant attended high school and completed
12. Following secondary school the appellant completed various
vocational courses. The appellant, when not in custody, maintained
in a variety of industries. The appellant's mother and siblings continued to
support him.
Regrettably,
after the breakdown of a long‑term relationship when the appellant was
21 years of age, he began meeting with
antisocial peers and became involved
in drug culture. The appellant began using methylamphetamine. However, during
the ensuing
14 years the appellant had been able ‑ from
time to time ‑ to abstain from the use of illicit drugs. For
example, the
appellant was drug‑free during the time he was on parole from
late October 2022 to late June 2023. The appellant had completed
prevention program and, before his 29 June 2023 arrest, had attended one
session of psychological counselling.
appellant has a substantial and serious prior criminal history.
2011, when the appellant was 22 years of age, he committed a driving
offence. On 31 August 2012 the appellant was sentenced for
a series of
drug offences committed in late August 2011 including two counts of possession
of methylamphetamine with intent to sell
or supply. The appellant was sentenced
to 2 years' imprisonment conditionally suspended for 18 months. The
appellant received a
minor fine in October 2015 for a weapons offence.
significantly, on 4 October 2017 the appellant was sentenced by
Jenkins J in the Supreme Court of Western Australia for numerous
offences and an offence of being an accessory after the fact to the murder of a
man on 26 April 2015. In relation to the accessory
offence, the appellant
assisted two others to wrap the deceased's body in a tarpaulin and subsequently,
again with others, disposed
of the body in the ocean using a borrowed dinghy.
The drug offences included four counts of selling a prohibited drug, one count
of possession of a prohibited drug with intent to sell or supply and one count
of offering to sell a prohibited drug. In each case
the prohibited drug was
methylamphetamine. There was also a multitude of other offences (many
drug‑related) committed by the
appellant over the same time period, for
which he was fined.
Barbagallo DCJ
observed, correctly, that the offending over this period represented a
significant escalation in the appellant's offending.
It arose from the
appellant's involvement in the business of drug dealing between August and
October 2015 (ts 36).
sentenced the appellant to 6 years' imprisonment for the offence of being
an accessory after the fact to murder and further
sentenced the appellant to
various terms of imprisonment for the drug offences. The result of the latter
sentences was that an additional
3 years' imprisonment was accumulated to
the 6‑year term meaning that Jenkins J imposed a total effective
sentence of 9 years'
imprisonment. The sentence was backdated to commence
on 28 October 2015.
in custody over 2016 to 2021 the appellant incurred a number of prison charges.
However, the appellant also took part in various
treatment interventions and
undertook some psychological counselling.
appellant was released on parole on 27 October 2022. At that time he had
served 7 years of the 9‑year term of imprisonment
Jenkins J. Thereafter, having completed additional vocational training,
the appellant had been employed in the crane
and rigging industry from February
2023 until his arrest for the subject offending in late June 2023.
appellant said that he had experienced some difficulty in reintegrating into
society after his long period of incarceration.
The appellant felt like he did
not belong in the community. The appellant returned to drug dealing when he was
he had met in prison. The appellant described the thrill
of conducting illegal activities as a motivating factor; another motivation
the satisfaction the appellant felt in helping out his criminal associates and
gaining their trust. The sentencing judge characterised
the appellant as being
a person with deeply embedded pro‑criminal attitudes who had been unable
to abstain from offending despite
completing educational courses and maintaining
employment and having a supportive family
(ts 37 ‑ 38).
Sentencing remarks
sentencing judge dealt with the objective circumstances of the offending
(ts 31 ‑ 33) and the appellant's personal circumstances
(ts 34 ‑ 38). Those matters have been considered in
earlier parts of these reasons. The sentencing judge considered that
appellant's pleas of guilty had been entered at the earliest opportunity and
determined that there should be a 25% discount pursuant
Sentencing Act 1995
(WA) (ts 38).
Her Honour also accepted that the appellant was remorseful, but only to the
extent that this was reflected by the appellant's
plea of guilty
to the appellant's motivation for offending, while the sentencing judge was
satisfied that the appellant had insight, her Honour
considered that the
appellant remained at a high risk of reoffending. That would remain the case
unless and until the appellant
decided that he had had enough of a life chasing
the thrill of being engaged in illegal activities
(ts 39 ‑ 40).
sentencing judge referred to the time the appellant had spent in custody since
his arrest, and the circumstances of the sentence
imposed by Jenkins J,
before stating:
You were released to parole ... on 27 October 2022. You were arrested for
the current offending eight months later while still on
parole. As such, the
parole order was suspended and you are currently serving the remainder of those
nine years. I acknowledge
your time in custody for your past offending and will
take it into account when I consider issues of totality (ts 41).
sentencing judge referred to the primary sentencing considerations for drug
dealing offences in conventional terms. Her Honour
then highlighted some
features of the offending in characterising the offences as serious
(ts 41). These included that the appellant
committed the offences for
financial gain and that he was on parole at the time of the offending. The
offences for which the appellant
was on parole included serious drug offences
(ts 41). After concluding the only available sentencing option was a term
of immediate
imprisonment (ts 42), the sentencing judge
There are, of course, two offences for which I must sentence you today. To
sentence according to law, I must necessarily fix an
appropriate sentence for
each offence and then consider questions of cumulation, concurrency and
totality. I will announce the individual
sentences I intend to impose on each
count, and then I will announce how I will structure the sentence to take into
account the totality
principles (ts 42).
sentencing judge proceeded to announce the individual sentences for the
offending the subject of counts 1 and 2. Thereafter
ordered that the sentence on count 2 was to be served cumulatively on the
sentence on count 1. Accordingly, the total
effective sentence was one of
10 years' imprisonment. Her Honour also ordered that the sentence would
commence at the expiration
of the sentence imposed by
Jenkins J ‑ meaning that the 10‑year total effective
sentence would commence on 28 October
Disposition
Applicable legal principles
ground of appeal that asserts that a sentencing judge has infringed the totality
principle involves an allegation of implied error.
Roffey v The State of
Western Australia
, McLure JA (Steytler P and Miller JA
agreeing) described the totality principle in these
The first limb is that the total effective sentence must bear a proper
relationship to the overall criminality involved in all the
offences, viewed in
their entirety and having regard to the circumstances of the case, including
those referable to the offender
personally.
The second limb is that the court should not impose a 'crushing' sentence. The
word crushing in this context connotes the destruction
of any reasonable
expectation of a useful life after release. An aggregate sentence may be
inappropriately long under the first
limb even if it cannot be described as
(citations omitted)
practical effect of the totality principle is ordinarily to arrive at an
aggregate sentence that is less than that which would
be arrived at by simply
adding up all the terms appropriate for the individual offences. A rationale
for the totality principle
is that there is assumed rehabilitation and reduced
demand for retribution after the initial sentence has been served:
Roffey v The State of
Western Australia
severity or leniency of an individual sentence (which is not manifestly
excessive or manifestly inadequate) is relevant in evaluating
whether the total
effective sentence infringes the first limb of the totality principle:
Giglia v The
State of Western
(as explained in
Gaskell v The State
general principles governing appeals against sentence contending that error
should be inferred on the basis that the total effective
sentence infringes the
totality principle are well established and need not be repeated. See for
Kabambi v The
State of Western
Ng v The State of
The critical issue is whether the length of the total effective sentence is
disproportionate to the overall criminality of the offending,
having regard to
all the circumstances of the case, including those referable to the offender
personally, so as to be unreasonable
or plainly unjust:
Jackamarra v The State of
matter of primary importance to the relevant principles is that sentencing is a
discretionary exercise. An appellate court can
only intervene if the appellant
demonstrates either an express or implied material error. An appellate court
cannot substitute its
own opinion for that of the sentencing judge merely
because the appellate court would have exercised a sentencing discretion
differently.
present purposes, so far as the contention is one of implied error, it suffices
to state that the ultimate question is whether
on the facts the total effective
sentence of 10 years' imprisonment for the appellant's offending is
unreasonable or plainly unjust
such that the court must conclude that a
substantial wrong has occurred:
House v The
The court must be driven to conclude that there must have been 'some
misapplication of principle' when regard is had to all of the
sentencing factors (including the degree to which the sentence differs from
sentences that have been imposed in comparable
consistency purposes, it is necessary to consider any broadly comparable cases
when evaluating whether a total effective sentence
infringes the first limb of
the totality principle. It must, however, be recognised that, when examining
the total effective sentences
in offending of a particular kind, the exercise of
comparison may be difficult and the usefulness of the broadly comparable cases
may be limited. While providing broad guidance, there will often be significant
differences in the circumstances of the offending
and the offenders. For
example, there will often be a different mix of offences, and number of offences
and victims, rendering the
comparison of limited utility. See
Pennetta v The State of
OTR v The State of Western
Weston v The State of
absence of broadly comparable cases is not a barrier to this court finding that
there has been an infringement of the totality
The State of Western
Australia v
The parties' submissions
appellant makes no complaint as to either of the individual sentences. The
challenge on appeal, based on an alleged infringement
of the first limb of the
totality principle, is confined to the total effective sentence. In that
respect, in particulars, the appellant
for the complete accumulation of the individual sentences are neither explicit
nor implicit in the sentencing outcome.
least a degree of concurrency was required (or was appropriate) to reflect the
appellant's overall conduct in circumstances
(a) the offences were committed during the same enterprise and were proximate in
(b) the appellant's parole ceased as and from 30 June 2023 as a result of
the offending the subject of counts 1 and 2 (the sentence
commencing until the expiration of the prior 9‑year sentence of
imprisonment imposed by Jenkins J).
point in subpar 2(b) above was added, by leave, during the appeal hearing
to reflect the argument that was being advanced by
counsel for the appellant
(appeal ts 5 ‑ 8). In substance, as counsel for the
appellant clarified during his oral address,
it meant that the operation of the
totality principle had to be considered by reference to the time that the
appellant had to serve
because of his parole being cancelled (approximately
16 months) as well as the total effective sentence of 10 years'
imprisonment
for the offending the subject of counts 1 and 2 (appeal
ts 6, 15). So understood, the totality argument did not rely on the
imprisonment that had been served before the appellant was
released on parole on 27 October 2022.
for the appellant was correct not to rely on the pre-parole component of the
9‑year total effective sentence imposed
by Jenkins J. To the extent
that the rationale for the totality principle is one of assumed rehabilitation,
that rationale was displaced
by the appellant's offending during his parole.
See, by analogy,
The State of Western
Any assumed rehabilitation for the sentencing exercise involving the offending
the subject of counts 1 and 2 was confined to the
period during which
the appellant's parole was suspended and subsequently cancelled.
State submits that a total effective sentence of 10 years' imprisonment for
possession of nearly a kilogram of cocaine and $78,450
in proceeds from the sale
or supply of prohibited drugs, aggravated by having been committed in breach of
parole for serious offending
that included other drug-related offending, does
not infringe the totality principle.
Consideration and determination
is nothing in the reasons point raised by the appellant. The ground alleging an
infringement of the first limb of the totality
error alleges implied error.
Whether or not the sentencing judge's reasons for accumulation are legally
adequate is beside the point.
Error of the kind raised by the ground is
inferred from the sentencing outcome rather than the reasons given by the
sentencing judge.
The complaint as particularised is outside the scope of the
single ground of appeal.
is there appellable error in not providing for a degree of concurrency between
the individual sentences. On the facts it was
reasonably open to the sentencing
judge to provide for the sentence imposed on count 1 to be served
consecutively on the sentence
imposed on count 2. Even if, as the
appellant asserted, the two offences related to the same criminal enterprise,
total concurrency
does not automatically follow. Even in such a circumstance
cumulative sentences might be justified. The critical point is whether
total effective sentence properly reflects an offender's overall criminality.
Hutton v The State of
The appellant's possession of the $78,450 in cash (being the proceeds of the
sale or supply of prohibited drugs) increased the overall
criminality involved
in the appellant's offending ‑ even more so where the offending
occurred while the appellant was on parole.
It demonstrated that the appellant
was involved in substantial drug dealing activities over and above his
possession of the 998
g of cocaine with intent to sell or supply.
appellant referred to
Watson v The State of
The State of Western
Australia v
Ta v The State of
in support of a contended for proposition that concurrency (or at least a degree
of concurrency) will be required for drug offences
comprised of both:
(1) possession of a prohibited drug with intent to sell or supply; and
(2) possession of cash that is the proceeds
of a drug-related offence.
is no such rule of law. The cases referred to by the appellant turned on their
particular facts. There are equally cases
in which this court has dismissed an
appeal where an offender alleged infringement of the first limb of the totality
principle due
to accumulation of a sentence for possession of money the proceeds
of drug dealing and a sentence for the possession of a prohibited
intent to sell or supply. See eg
Musulin v The State of
The State of Western
Australia v
Nguyen v The State of
Also, in resentencing one of two appellants in
Wong v The State of
this court ordered that a sentence for possession of money that was reasonably
suspected to have been unlawfully obtained, contrary
to s 417(1) of the
Code, be accumulated in full with a sentence for possession of a prohibited drug
with intent to sell or supply,
contrary to
Misuse of Drugs Act
(for totality
reasons an adjustment was afforded to the other appellant [99]).
oral submissions, counsel for the appellant referred to
VXM v The State of Western
Counsel referred to the following passage:
The so-called 'one transaction rule' is not a rule of law but merely a rule of
thumb - it is no more than a working guide in the
exercise of the sentencing
discretion. It applies where:
number of offences arise out of substantially the same act, circumstances or
series of occurrences;
is one multi-faceted course of criminal conduct; or
number of offences are considered to be manifestations of the one criminal
enterprise, transaction or episode.
It is not a principle of sentencing law that concurrent terms
be imposed for multiple offences
constituting one transaction or a continuing episode. Even if the offences are
properly considered
part of one transaction, the sentencing judge must always
consider whether the requirement that the total effective sentence imposed
proportional to the total criminality involved might demand cumulative or partly
cumulative terms.
In the present case, a degree of accumulation was open and, in my view,
appropriate.
The appellant's possession of a substantial amount of money which was reasonably
suspected to have been unlawfully obtained materially
increased the total
criminality of the appellant's offending as a whole. Money is not the same as a
prohibited drug. Two things
are apparent insofar as the appellant's role was to
warehouse and provide a safe place for the storage of both the prohibited drugs
and a considerable quantity of cash. First, the trust reposed in the appellant
by the owner of the prohibited drugs and the money
was considerable. Second,
the role undertaken by the appellant in support of the particular drug
distribution network was of increased
importance to what it would have been had
the appellant simply been providing a safehouse for the prohibited drugs.
... [F]or these reasons, a degree of accumulation was appropriate ...
[64] - [68]. (original emphasis) (citations omitted)
for the appellant focused on the words 'a degree of accumulation was
appropriate'. Counsel submitted that, inferentially,
this meant that a degree
of concurrency was also required. That inference ought not be drawn from the
quoted passage.
relied on by the appellant is responding to a submission that where prohibited
drugs and cash proceeds of drug offending are found
in the same place, at the
same time, and in the same circumstances, there is - in terms of overall
criminality - a single transaction
[63]. That submission was rejected. In
the sentence
for the count whereby the offender was in possession of stolen or unlawfully
obtained property was nominally accumulated
in full. However, there was in
effect a partial accumulation so far as the sentence for that offending was
reduced for totality
[16], [77]. The passage is responding to a submission that
there should have been
accumulation
whatsoever. The passage relied on by the appellant deals with the factual
circumstances in
where there was a degree of accumulation ‑ finding that in the
circumstances that was open and appropriate.
does not go
further and purport to provide for a rule of law whereby a degree of concurrency
is required or is appropriate whenever
an offender is in possession of both
prohibited drugs and the cash proceeds of drug dealing.
true significance of
recognition that, while a degree of accumulation was appropriate, that
conclusion could not alone answer whether the first
limb of the totality
principle had been infringed [68]. It was necessary to go on and consider
whether the total effective sentence
bore a proper relationship to the overall
criminality involved in all the offences, viewed in their entirety, having
regard to all
relevant circumstances including those referable to the appellant
personally, and the total effective sentences imposed in comparable
this respect the only point of arguable merit raised by the appellant in support
of his single ground of appeal is that
summarised in [
](2)(b) above.
have already addressed the objective circumstances of the offending and the
appellant's personal circumstances. Before assessing
the overall criminality
involved in the offending, and whether the total effective sentence bears a
proper relationship to that overall
criminality, it is necessary to say
something about comparable cases. The parties only made passing reference to
comparable cases.
None were referred to by the appellant. The State referred
Tricoli v The State of
Tran v The State of
ATH v The State of
is only helpful so far as the court observed that possession of a large quantity
of cocaine often attracts sentences of up to 10
years' imprisonment [5].
In the present case the appellant had possession of a large quantity of cocaine.
However, in drawing any
implication from the observation in
also be remembered that the appellant pleaded guilty at the first reasonable
opportunity and received a 25% discount. Otherwise
there are comparable
features in the appellant's offending and the offending in
regard to the lesser quantity of the prohibited drug in
8‑year total effective sentence for the offending in
consistent with the 10‑year total effective sentence in the present case.
The offending in
is not broadly
comparable with the offending in the present case. The total effective
sentences imposed in
were solely for
possession of prohibited drugs with intent to sell or supply. In any event both
were concerned
with parity issues rather than whether there had been an infringement of the
totality principle.
comparable cases referred to by the parties do not sustain the conclusion that,
standing alone, a 10‑year total effective
sentence for the appellant's
offending the subject of counts 1 and 2 infringed the first limb of
the totality principle.
standing alone, is a 10‑year total effective sentence disproportionate to
the overall criminality involved in the offending
(having regard to the
appellant's personal circumstances and the comparable cases). This latter
conclusion is implicit in and follows
from the reasons already given in
rejecting the appellant's contention that at least a degree of concurrency was
required to reflect
the appellant's overall conduct in circumstances where the
offences were committed during the same enterprise and were proximate
The appellant's offending was extremely serious. The major sentencing
considerations for offences of dealing or trafficking
in dangerous drugs of
addiction are general and personal deterrence. Matters personal to the offender
are not irrelevant but will
almost always be subsidiary considerations. The
appellant's offending was aggravated insofar as the appellant was actuated by
gain and the offences were committed while the appellant was on parole
(in part for offending involving other serious drug offences).
There were no
substantial mitigating factors apart from the appellant's pleas of guilty. The
appellant's prior criminal history,
and his high risk of reoffending, meant that
personal deterrence is a substantial sentencing consideration. So too is the
of the community.
for reasons already explained, the 10‑year total effective sentence did
not stand alone. The 10‑year total effective
sentence imposed for the
offending the subject of counts 1 and 2 would not commence to be
served until the appellant completed the
remainder of the sentence imposed by
Jenkins J. The total effective sentence of 10 years' imprisonment
followed the 16 months' imprisonment
that the appellant was to serve
following the suspension and subsequent cancellation of his parole.
totality principle requires that a court, in deciding upon the appropriate
sentence for an offence, take into account any sentence
that the offender is
then serving for another offence. In that respect the totality principle has
been applied, either directly
or by analogy, where a court is sentencing an
offender and the offender is serving a sentence for another offence, even if he
she has been released on parole in respect of the sentence for the other
offence. Indeed, the totality principle has also been applied
by analogy, in
some circumstances, where a sentence for a previous offence has been completed.
Hishmeh v The State of
and the cases cited therein. In the present case the appellant was a serving
prisoner at the time he was sentenced. The appellant
had to complete the final
16 months of the sentence imposed by Jenkins J following the suspension and
cancellation of his parole.
In accordance with authority, that was a matter to
be taken into account in the application of the totality principle.
having regard to the appellant's extensive prior criminal history, and his
reoffending after seven years' imprisonment, it cannot
be assumed that the
appellant was beyond rehabilitation. If that were the case the sentencing judge
would not have ordered that
the appellant was to be eligible for parole. The
time that the appellant had spent and was to spend in prison completing the
of the sentence imposed by Jenkins J was time contributing to
assumed rehabilitation for the purpose of the first limb of the totality
sentencing judge stated that the appellant's time in custody for his previous
offending would be taken into account when considering
issues of totality (see
] above). It is not obvious how
her Honour took that matter into account (see [
] above). Assuming, however, that the
matter was taken into account, we are not satisfied that the sentencing judge
did so in a manner
that suffices for the purpose of the first limb of the
totality principle.
10‑year total effective sentence imposed on the appellant was undoubtedly
high. That is particularly so given the 25%
discount the appellant received for
his early pleas of guilty. The discount is applied to the 'head sentence' for
the individual
counts (in the sense defined in
Sentencing Act
). However, it is to be
expected that the discount will be reflected in the total effective sentence.
That is inevitably so where
two individual terms of imprisonment are accumulated
and neither term is reduced for reasons of totality.
are satisfied, for the reasons we have given, that the 10‑year total
effective sentence bears a proper relationship to the
total criminality of the
appellant's offending the subject of counts 1 and 2 as a whole. That
said, the 10‑year total effective
sentence approaches, but in the end does
not reach, a length which is properly characterised as unreasonable or plainly
However, the actual sentencing disposition has the effect that the
commencement date of the 10‑year total effective sentence
is deferred.
The appellant had to serve the remaining 16 months of the sentence imposed
by Jenkins J before commencing the sentence
imposed for the further
offending. In this context the 10‑year total effective sentence does
infringe the first limb of the
totality principle.
are satisfied, having regard to all relevant sentencing factors and
considerations as mentioned by the sentencing judge and as
recorded in these
reasons, that in circumstances where the appellant was to serve the remaining
16 months of the existing sentence
before commencing to serve the new term
of imprisonment, the further total effective sentence of 10 years'
imprisonment imposed by
the sentencing judge did not bear a proper relationship
to the total criminality of the appellant's offending as a whole.
reaching that conclusion we are conscious that the relevant offending is not
limited to the offending the subject of counts 1
and 2. It includes
the offending for which the appellant was sentenced by Jenkins J. But in
taking that offending into account
we also take into account that the appellant
had to serve the total effective sentence imposed by Jenkins J for that
It is true that the appellant reoffended. Moreover, the appellant
reoffended despite being on parole. Personal deterrence and the
protection of
the community are substantial sentencing considerations. But in all sentencing
exercises there comes a point where
the length of imprisonment exceeds that
which is open on a proper exercise of the sentencing discretion. That point was
where, having imposed an undoubtedly high total effective sentence for
the offending the subject of counts 1 and 2, no allowance
was afforded
by the sentencing judge for the remainder of the term of imprisonment that the
appellant had to serve upon the suspension
and cancellation of his parole. The
resulting sentencing outcome is unreasonable or plainly unjust and signifies
that a substantial
wrong has occurred. We are driven to conclude that there has
been a misapplication of principle. The length of the total effective
viewed in the context that the appellant had to complete the remaining
16 months of the sentence imposed by Jenkins J before
commencing the
new sentence, is disproportionate to the overall criminality of the offending
including those circumstances referable
to the appellant personally.
Accordingly,
the total effective sentence of 10 years' imprisonment, commencing
28 October 2024, infringed the first limb of the
totality principle so far
as it imposed a further 10 years of imprisonment commencing from the time
that the appellant served the
16 months' imprisonment that remained of the
sentence imposed by Jenkins J.
appellant's single ground of appeal succeeds. There should be leave to appeal
on the single ground of appeal and the appeal
should be allowed. The sentences
imposed on the appellant by Barbagallo DCJ should be set aside and the
court should proceed to
resentence the
Resentencing and orders
court has the necessary materials for resentencing.
will not repeat the facts and circumstances of the offending or the appellant's
personal circumstances. There is no challenge
to the individual sentences as
imposed by the sentencing judge. In exercising the sentencing discretion afresh
we would impose the
same individual sentences for the offending the subject of
counts 1 and 2. In doing so, like the sentencing judge, in
recognition
of the appellant's pleas of guilty at the first reasonable
opportunity, we would reduce the head sentence of imprisonment we would
otherwise have imposed for each count by 25% pursuant to
Sentencing Act
is necessary, in the application of the totality principle, to recognise that
the offending the subject of count 1 was separate
and distinct from the
offending the subject of count 2. The seriousness of the appellant's
overall offending requires a degree of
accumulation. However, in exercising the
sentencing discretion afresh ‑ after having regard to all
relevant sentencing factors
and circumstances ‑ we would not
accumulate in full. We accept, for the reasons previously given, that it is
open to do so.
But there is no single correct sentence. In exercising the
sentencing discretion afresh this court cannot simply adopt the sentence
by the sentencing judge merely because that sentence was open. To the contrary,
this court must itself assess the sentencing
factors and considerations and
impose the sentence it considers to be commensurate with the seriousness of the
application of the totality principle, we would impose a total effective
sentence of 9 years' immediate imprisonment rather than
the 10‑year
total effective sentence imposed by the sentencing judge. To achieve this
outcome we would, for reasons of totality,
reduce the sentence imposed on
count 1 from 2 years' immediate imprisonment to 1 year immediate
imprisonment and order that the new
sentence for count 1 be served
cumulatively upon the new sentence for count 2.
again for totality reasons, we would order that the appellant's new total
effective sentence is taken to have begun on 30 June
2023 (when the
appellant's parole was suspended). Accordingly, in substance there will be a
degree of concurrency between the remainder
of the appellant's existing
9‑year total effective sentence (as imposed by Jenkins J) and the
appellant's new 9‑year
total effective sentence (as imposed by this
court). With this adjustment the new 9‑year total effective sentence
on the appellant bears a proper relationship to the overall criminality
involved in all of the appellant's offences, viewed in their
entirety, having
regard to all relevant facts and circumstances, including those referable to him
personally and to all relevant
sentencing factors and considerations.
should continue to be a parole eligibility order.
Accordingly,
we would order as
time for the appellant to commence an appeal under
Criminal Appeals Act 2004
the sentences imposed on him by Barbagallo DCJ in the District Court of
Western Australia on 24 May 2024 in IND 2092 of
2023 is extended to
7 November 2024.
appellant has leave to appeal on the single ground of appeal contained within
the appellant's case dated 2 December 2024.
appeal is allowed.
sentences imposed on the appellant by Barbagallo DCJ in the District Court
of Western Australia on 24 May 2024 in IND 2092 of
2023 are set
appellant is resentenced as follows in respect of the counts the subject of
District Court of Western Australia IND 2092 of
(a) count 1 - 1 year immediate imprisonment;
(b) count 2 - 8 years' immediate
imprisonment.
new sentence of 1 year immediate imprisonment on count 1 is to be
served cumulatively on the new sentence of 8 years' immediate
imprisonment
on count 2. Accordingly, the new total effective sentence imposed on the
appellant is 9 years' immediate imprisonment.
new total effective sentence of 9 years' imprisonment is backdated to
commence from 30 June 2023 (meaning that between 30 June
27 October 2024 the appellant was to serve and did serve the term of
imprisonment imposed by these orders concurrently with
the term of imprisonment
that the appellant was serving imposed by Jenkins J on 4 October 2017
in INS 181 of 2016 and INS 319 of
appellant is eligible for parole.
certify that the preceding paragraph(s) comprise the reasons for decision of the
Supreme Court of Western Australia.
Associate to the Hon Justice
7 NOVEMBER 2025
Roffey v The State of
Western Australia
[2007] WASCA 246
[24] ‑ [25].
Giglia v The
State of Western Australia
[2010] WASCA 9
Gaskell v The State of
Western Australia
[2018] WASCA 8
[56], [59],
Kabambi v The State of
Western Australia
[2019] WASCA 44
Ng v The State of Western
[2025] WASCA 121
[86] ‑ [95].
Jackamarra v The State of
Western Australia
[2019] WASCA 150
House v The King
[1936] HCA 40
(1936) 55 CLR 499
[2015] HCA 39
(2015) 256 CLR 550
Pennetta v The State of
Western Australia
[2013] WASCA 234
OTR v The State of Western
Australia [No 2]
[2022] WASCA 123
Weston v The State of
Western Australia
[2025] WASCA 131
The State of Western
Australia v Popal
[2020] WASCA 200
Carr v The State of
Western Australia
[2006] WASCA 125
(2006) 166 A Crim R 1
Hutton v The State of
Western Australia
[2022] WASCA 133
Watson v The State of
Western Australia
[2022] WASCA 80
The State of Western
Australia v Radford
[2022] WASCA 142
Ta v The State of Western
[2022] WASCA 49
Musulin v The State of
Western Australia
[2020] WASCA 18
[84] ‑ [85] (here the
possession of the money was offending contrary to s 417(1) of the
The State of Western
Australia v Paolucci
[2020] WASCA 188
Nguyen v The State of
Western Australia
[2021] WASCA 198
[48] ‑ [49].
Wong v The State of
Western Australia
[2019] WASCA 8
[89] ‑ [90].
VXM v The State of Western
[2022] WASCA
Tricoli v The State of
Western Australia
[2011] WASCA
Tran v The State of
Western Australia
[2015] WASCA
ATH v The State of Western
[2021] WASCA
Hishmeh v The State of
Western Australia
[2025] WASCA 14
[34] - [36] (see also
[38] - [41], [108] - [112]).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (270 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter