URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WASC/2025/476.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:07:49
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
THE STATE OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA -v- RODD [No 3] [2025] WASC 476 (12 November 2025)
COURT OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
STATE OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA -v- RODD [No 3]
[2025] WASC 476
NOVEMBER 2025
DELIVERED :
NOVEMBER 2025
SO 14 of 2023
STATE OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
RUDOLPH RODD
Serious Offenders Act 2020
(WA) - Review
of the respondent's detention - Whether respondent remains a high risk serious
offender - Whether continuing detention
order or supervision order
appropriate
Legislation:
Risk Serious Offenders Act 2020
remains a high risk serious
Continuing detention order
Representation:
Ms T Hollaway
Mr D McKenzie
Solicitors:
State Solicitor's
Legal Aid WA
referred to in decision(s):
of Contents
Introduction
19 May 2025 the State of Western Australia applied for an order that the
respondent's detention under the continuing detention
order made on
29 October 2024 be reviewed as soon as practicable after 28 October
2025 pursuant to
Serious Offenders Act 2020
the terms of
Serious Offenders Act
the outcome of the application turned upon the
answer to two questions. First, did the respondent remain a high risk serious
within the meaning of
High Risk Serious Offenders Act
Secondly, if the respondent did remain a high risk serious offender, should the
continuing detention order be affirmed or should
the continuing detention order
be rescinded and a supervision order made?
hearing of the application took place on 6 November 2025. It was the
State's position that the respondent remained a high risk
serious offender
within the meaning of the
High Risk Serious
Offenders Act
; and if the Court was to so find, then the Court ought to
affirm the continuing detention order pursuant to
s 68(1)(b)(i)
High Risk Serious Offenders Act
Counsel for the respondent did not seek to persuade the Court that the
respondent did not remain a high risk serious offender within
the meaning of the
High Risk Serious Offenders Act
he remained so was a concession expressly made (albeit it was acknowledged to
ultimately be a matter for the Court). That the
Court should affirm the
continuing detention order was not
weighing the submissions of counsel in light of all of the evidence adduced, I
was satisfied that the respondent remained a
high risk serious offender within
the meaning of the
High Risk Serious
Offenders Act
; and that the continuing detention order ought be affirmed
pursuant to
s 68(1)(b)(i).
Set out below are my
Background to the
application
19 December 2023 an application was made on behalf of the State for an
that the respondent be subject
to a restriction order under
High Risk Serious Offenders Act
on 14 May 2024 Fiannaca J imposed an interim detention order pending
the final determination of the restriction order application.
the hearing of the restriction order application on 29 October 2024 the
respondent was found to be a high risk serious offender
High Risk Serious Offenders Act
The Court was satisfied by acceptable and cogent evidence and to a high
degree of probability that it was necessary to make a restriction
order on the
basis that there was a need to ensure adequate protection of the community
against the unacceptable risk that the respondent
would commit a serious
offence. Further, the Court found there to be no conditions that could be
imposed that would adequately reduce
the risk that the respondent would commit
further serious offences if he was released into the
with the imposition of a
supervision order. Accordingly, a continuing detention order was made and took
effect from 29 October 2024.
is noted above, on 19 May 2025 the State applied for a review of the
continuing detention order under s 64 of the
High Risk Serious Offender
as soon as practicable after
28 October 2025. On 23 June 2025 orders were made that included an
order listing the application to
be heard on 6 November 2025, and for the
provision of certain reports.
State foreshadowed in its written submissions filed in advance of the review
hearing, that it would submit there to be a sufficient
basis for the Court to
find that the respondent remains a high risk serious offender, and if the Court
was to so find, then the Court
ought to affirm the continuing detention order
made on 29 October 2024. While it was acknowledged on behalf of the State
respondent's case had marginally improved with the commencement of
individual psychological counselling, improvement was not yet
sufficient to
reduce the respondent's risk, even with significant restrictions and
supervision, as would be applicable on a supervision
background to the application, the respondent's offending history, and the
circumstances in which the restriction order was made
were summarised in the
reasons for decision published on 20 November 2024:
The State of Western
Australia v Rodd [No 2]
[2024] WASC 432.
These reasons should
be read with this earlier decision.
Statutory framework and
legal principles
appeared to be no dispute between the parties as to the law and the principles
to be applied in undertaking this review. They
are recorded in a number of
decisions of this Court, and comprehensively in
The State of Western
Australia v Woodward [No 3]
[2023] WASC 83
[17] to [40]. In
undertaking this review, I applied the law and principles summarised by
Derrick J, and had regard to the same as
if [17] to [40] of his Honour's
reasons were reproduced here in full. In addition, I note as follows.
to [25] of his Honour's reasons, a 'serious offence' is an offence that is
specified in sch 1 div 1 of the
High Risk Serious Offenders
, or is specified in sch 1
div 2 and is committed in circumstances indicated in relation to that
Schedule 1 comprises a list of serious violent and sexual offences, the
majority of which attract a maximum penalty of imprisonment
of seven years or
more. In relation to sexual offences, the offences set out in sch 1
div 1 include all offences formerly defined
as 'serious sexual offences'
Dangerous Sexual Offenders Act 2006
the Court must assess the risk that the offender will commit 'a serious
offence', the application must specify the serious
offence within sch 1 to
High Risk Serious Offenders Act
which the State alleges there is an unacceptable risk that the offender will
Serious Offenders Act
, before a restriction order can be made, the State
has the onus of proving that it is 'necessary to make a restriction order in
to the offender to ensure adequate protection of the community' against
an 'unacceptable'
I note that 'community' is defined in terms that include 'any community' and is
not limited to the community of Western Australia
provides that proceedings under the
High Risk Serious Offenders Act
an appeal under the
High Risk Serious
Offenders Act
, are taken to be criminal proceedings for all purposes.
However, anything that is to be evidenced for the purposes of the
High Risk Serious Offenders Act
not be evidenced to a higher standard than is required by
I note that if upon review a respondent is found to remain a high risk serious
offender, the Court does not approach the
application with a predisposition to
affirm the continuing detention order. Again, in deciding whether to affirm the
continuing detention
order or to rescind it and make a supervision order, the
paramount consideration is the need to ensure adequate protection of the
the hearing of this application on 6 November 2025, a book of materials in
two volumes was received into evidence without
The first volume was dated 19 August
The second volume was dated 21 October
Together the two books of materials comprise over 475 pages.
first volume contained a copy of the State's application for review; the
respondent's criminal record;
chronology of the respondent's offending prepared by the State dated
18 December 2023; the decision following the hearing of the
restriction
order application dated 20 November 2024:
The State of Western
Australia v Rodd [No 2]
various Department of Justice prison
medical progress notes and
substance use test results; and an individual management plan with decision date
29 May 2025. The first
volume also contained a copy of reports prepared for
the purposes of the hearing of the restriction order application under
High Risk Serious Offenders Act
(all created in September 2024).
second volume contained a copy of materials provided by the Department of
Justice (with preparation dates ranging from March
2017 to May 2024)
and a copy of the reports prepared for the purposes of this review application.
The reports prepared for the purposes
of this review application were the
psychiatric report dated 30 September 2025 prepared by consultant forensic
psychiatrist Dr Edward
Petch; the community supervision assessment report
dated 17 October 2025 prepared by senior community corrections officer
Paul Mackie;
and the Forensic Psychological Assessment Team high risk
serious offender treatment progress report dated 30 September 2025 prepared
forensic psychologist Emily Selby.
6 November 2025 the State called two witnesses who gave evidence. They
(a) Dr Petch, a forensic psychiatrist and author of the psychiatric report
dated 30 September 2025; and
(b) Nicole Bennetts, a senior community corrections officer within the Community
Offender Monitoring Unit of the Department of Justice.
Ms Bennetts was the
community corrections officer for the respondent before Mr Mackie took
carriage of the respondent's supervision.
Mr Mackie was the author of and one of
the four signatories to a community supervision assessment report dated
the course of the hearing, the respondent did not give evidence and no
documentary evidence was tendered on his
The findings, therefore, were grounded upon the documentary evidence including
the reports received, the evidence of the two witnesses
called on behalf of the
State, and the cross‑examination of the State's witnesses.
Antecedents and criminal
now turn to the matters that were relevant to determining whether or not the
respondent remained a high risk serious offender pursuant
High Risk Serious Offenders Act
deciding, I was cognisant that the Court must have regard to the person's
antecedents and criminal record. That required all
prior offences to be
considered, to the extent that
offences were relevant to the question of whether the respondent was a high risk
serious offender within the meaning of the
High Risk Serious Offenders Act
they be serious offences or
not). It also required consideration of the person's antecedents, including the
context in which the past
offences were
the purposes of the review hearing, the respondent's criminal record and
antecedents were relevant in and of themselves but were
also relevant to the
question of whether the respondent has a propensity to commit serious offences
in the future. Furthermore, his
criminal record and antecedents were relevant in
ascertaining whether there was any pattern to his offending
It was therefore convenient to first consider the respondent's antecedents and
criminal history as required by
respondent's background, antecedents and history of offending were summarised in
The State of Western
Australia v Rodd [No 2]
at [42] to [63]. I had regard to the same as
if reproduced here in full. In addition to what was there recorded, summarised
are additional matters that have arisen since the hearing of the
restriction order application in October 2024.
respondent reported that within a custodial setting, he had focussed on tending
prison grounds, and more recently had held a
full‑time role in the
education department of Albany Regional Prison teaching art to other prisoners
four days per
Relationships
respondent reported to Dr Petch that he was in a relationship with his
former partner, with whom he shared two (now adult) children
and with whom he
had been in a relationship, on and off, for over 30 years (interrupted
mainly by reason of the respondent's incarceration).
The respondent also
reported that he and his partner were in regular contact by telephone and by
occasional visits. The respondent
hoped to reside with his partner in Busselton
Alcohol and substance abuse
respondent reported that he had previously used cannabis in custody but had not
The respondent had been subject to 11 substance use tests since the last
Court hearing, all of which had returned negative
Criminal record
respondent has an extensive criminal history. Included in the materials tendered
on behalf of the State was a criminal history
report which recorded the
respondent's first offence date as being 3 May 1977 when he was
the purpose of the restriction order hearing in October 2024 the State had
prepared a chronology of the respondent's serious
and other relevant offending
dated 18 December
It was reproduced in the first volume of the book of materials, and I again had
regard to the same for the purposes of this review
The chronology included the date
and nature of each offence; a high level summary of the material facts for each
offence; the date
of outcome; and the outcome or sentence imposed.
The State of Western
Australia v Rodd [No 2]
[56] to [60], I summarised
the respondent's criminal history. I also had regard to the same as if
reproduced here in full.
was there observed, the respondent has a history of very serious offending,
which has included domestic violence, sexual violence
and assaults on police.
There are 12 offences defined as serious offences under
High Risk Serious Offenders
. Based on the information
contained in the books of materials, Dr Petch in his report dated
30 September 2025 calculated that the
respondent had spent approximately
54.7% of his time since his 18th birthday
incarcerated.
Recent behaviour while
subject to the continuing detention order
was recorded that the respondent was involved in eight incidents since the
imposition of the continuing detention order on 29
October 2024.
Departmental records indicated that one had resulted in a formal charge against
the respondent. That is, on 6 February
2025 the respondent was charged with
using insulting or threatening language towards
to the other seven non‑critical incidents, three were described as
relating to the management of the respondent's diabetes
and non‑compliance
with respect to medication. The others concerned the use of abusive language
towards staff, theft, and the
storing excessive amounts of communal food items
noted above at [26], the respondent had not returned any positive urinalysis
test while subject to the continuing detention
Propensity to commit
serious offences in the future -
word 'propensity' is taken to have its ordinary meaning in the context of the
criminal law, that is, to have an inclination or
tendency to do
Director of Public
Prosecutions (WA) v GTR
[2008] WASCA 187
, in the context of
an application made under the
Sexual Offenders Act
Murray AJA stated
[Propensity] means that the offender has an inclination or tendency, a
disposition to commit serious sexual offences generally, in
a particular way, or
upon a particular type of victim. The word refers to some identifiable
characteristic of the offender, something
in his makeup or personality which may
or may not be of a quality of a diagnosable mental illness or personality
respondent has committed a number of very serious offences. His criminal history
includes 12 offences defined as serious under
High Risk Serious Offender Act,
include two counts of carnal knowledge with a girl under 16; seven counts of
aggravated sexual penetration without consent;
two counts of aggravated indecent
assault; and one count of doing grievous bodily harm to another with intent to
do grievous bodily
harm. His offending commenced in his adolescence and
persisted into adulthood.
regard to his extensive offending history, the State maintained that the
respondent continues to have a propensity for violence
towards women and has
shown a pattern of both intimate partner violence and also violence towards
On behalf of the State it was submitted that therefore, the respondent presents
a danger towards women. It was noted that he has
longstanding views that
normalise violence against women; that he has outstanding treatment needs; and
that women need to be protected
accepted that it could be concluded (when regard is had to the respondent's
history of offending) that he has a propensity to commit
serious sexual or
offences in the future. Further, I found that the respondent has a propensity to
act violently towards women, which
includes the propensity to commit acts of
serious sexual violence towards women.
appears that drug or alcohol use were involved in all of the respondent's
previous offending. On this, Dr Petch in his latest
report opined
The propensity of [the respondent] to commit serious offending is underpinned by
his anti-social personality disorder, and his substance
misuse disorders
(currently in remission in custody).
He has a well-established tendency to offend, and to be seriously violent in the
context of broader coercive control in domestic
relationships, usually whilst
using substances. He has also been sexually violent whilst intoxicated. These
risks are likely to increase
in certain situations, particularly if he is
inadequately supervised, supported or treated (for his substance misuse). The
is substantially driven by intoxication, and if that can be managed
his overall risk is likely to be moderated. I think though the
risk would still
remain high. I am of the view that [the respondent] still lacks the capacity to
control his behaviour and his substance
misuse in the community, even if a full
package of support is provided. He has little appreciation that this is needed
successfully in the community. His overall understanding and
appreciation of the current situation is limited. It may be starting
repetition and nature of the respondent's offending, and the fact that he has
continued to offend despite being convicted and
serving periods of detention,
further supported the finding that the respondent has a propensity to commit
against women serious
offences (within the meaning of the
High Risk Serious Offenders Act
particularly if intoxicated.
Whether or not there is any
pattern of offending behaviour -
as it pertains to behaviour, is defined in the Macquarie online dictionary as a
recurrent way of acting by an individual
or group towards a given object or in a
given situation.
repeat and adopt the finding made
The State of Western
Australia v Rodd [No 2]
at [73]: 'A review of the respondent's
offending behaviour reveals that he repeatedly has been violent towards women,
which violence
has included brutal sexual violence where he has sought to
overpower through physical violence and threats'. I considered there to
clear pattern to the respondent's offending
Efforts to address
offending behaviour and whether or not the participation in any rehabilitation
program has had a positive effect
considered whether the respondent had made efforts to address the cause or
causes of his offending behaviour, including by participating
rehabilitation programs, and whether or not such participation had had a
positive effect.
of the respondent's treatment and participation in rehabilitation programs were
recorded in the treatment progress report
of Ms Selby dated
30 September 2025. It was recorded that the respondent participated in an
Intensive Sex Offender Treatment Program
in 2002 and again in 2010; a Building
Better Relationships Program in 2004; a Pathways Program in 2018; and a Stopping
Family Violence
Program in 2022. It was also recorded that the respondent had
refused to participate in violent offending treatment programs on two
occasions, in 2020 and in 2022. Ms Selby further noted that the
respondent's participation in programmatic intervention had
generally been
described as disruptive, oppositional, and at times aggressive. Despite this, it
was reported that he had made emerging
gains in each program, though significant
outstanding treatment needs
the period since 29 October 2024, the respondent had engaged in
19 individual intervention sessions via videolink with a psychologist
the Forensic Psychological Intervention Team, Mr Eliot Becker. These
sessions had occurred fortnightly from 2 September 2024
to 1 September
2025. It was reported that the respondent was initially disinterested but
generally engaged positively in the
was some evidence that the respondent's engagement in individual counselling had
had some protective effect. In his report,
Dr Petch made the following
observations:
The programs he has received have not been well tailored to meet his needs and I
think probably have been negligible in terms of
the impact they have had on his
offending. He had not been able to reflect on his offending, the effects of the
offending on his
victims or himself, and make any meaningful connections
relating to risk factors, how they may affect him and how their impact might
reduced. Each time he has participated in a program, facilitators have stated
how many insights are just emerging or are yet to
be achieved, rather than being
demonstrated. Some insight as expressed in some of the programs do not appear to
have endured. He
seems to always require a further program and be recommended
for one, suggesting that his progress in that program was less than
required to
mitigate his risks and more work was always required. He has ... engaged well in
an individual program, and may have
started to demonstrate some progress. This
is very encouraging. Unfortunately, in the absence of report regarding the
treatment and
his responses to it, it is not possible for me at this stage to
elaborate on the extent of this progress.
accepted that the respondent continues to have outstanding rehabilitation and
treatment needs. While the respondent had reportedly
made some gains, there
remained many key criminogenic issues including jealousy, intimate partner
relationships, and alcohol use
which had not been sufficiently addressed in
the hearing of the restriction order application on 29 October 2024 and in
the reasons of
of Western Australia v Rodd [No 2]
at [257], it was noted that 'the
respondent ought to be encouraged to continue to participate in individual
counselling; and in conjunction
be referred to participate in a Violence
Prevention program so as to maximise the opportunity for improvement, as was
suggested by
the opportunity to participate a violence prevention program while subject to
the continuing detention order had been made
available to the respondent, he had
elected to not participate. The respondent was booked to begin the Violence
Prevention Program
at Acacia Prison, and in May 2025 he indicated to custodial
staff that he was not willing to transfer prisons to complete the program,
citing that he did not want to disrupt the stability and routine he felt he had
achieved at his current
No such program was available at Albany Regional Prison.
I accepted that the respondent had made notable effort to address the cause or
causes of his offending behaviour by participating
in 19 individual
intervention sessions with Mr Becker, on the evidence there appeared to
remain a propensity to commit serious offences
and ongoing treatment needs.
Furthermore, I noted the evidence of Dr Petch that it was not possible to
estimate the period of time
that the respondent would require to make necessary
Expert reports and extent
to which the respondent cooperated with examinations -
High Risk Serious Offenders
concerns the review of detention, and
provides that
unless the Court otherwise orders, the chief executive officer of the Department
of Justice must engage one or more
qualified experts to prepare reports in
accordance with
to be used on a review under
23 June 2025 the Court made a number of programming orders by consent, which
included an order that the respondent undergo examination
by a qualified expert,
namely Dr Petch, for the purpose of preparing a report to be used at the
hearing of the State's review
application.
had assessed the respondent on a number of occasions prior to assessing him for
the purposes of this application, including
for the purposes of the hearing on
29 October 2024.
determining the application before me, I had regard to the latest report and
evidence of Dr Petch, which are summarised below.
The following is not
intended to be a complete recitation of the contents of the report or
Dr Petch's evidence.
Dr Petch's report and
Qualifications and
page 4 of his report, Dr Petch described his qualifications. Among other
things, Dr Petch is a fellow of the UK Royal College
of Psychiatrists and
the Royal Australian and New Zealand College of Psychiatrists. He has extensive
experience in preparing expert
psychiatric reports and evidence. No concern as
to Dr Petch's qualification or field of expertise was raised on behalf of
the respondent.
to the sources of his information, Dr Petch recorded that he interviewed
the respondent in person at Albany Regional Prison on
16 September 2025 for
approximately one and a half hours; had regard to the first volume of the book
of materials; and relied heavily
upon his previous psychiatric report dated
17 September
was no suggestion in Dr Petch's report that the respondent had failed to
co‑operate with the examination. Indeed, Dr
Petch recorded that the
respondent was much more insightful regarding his difficulties than he had been
previously.
He also gave evidence that the respondent was more engaged, read
pre‑prepared statements and generally appeared to be keen
to engage in the
process more so than on the last
the heading 'Interview' Dr Petch recorded information provided by the
respondent which was an update to that recorded in his
17 September 2024, under the subheadings of family history; personal
history; educational history; occupational history;
relationship history; drug
history; alcohol history; past medical history; and past psychiatric history.
other things, the respondent reported to Dr Petch
(a) he had engaged in a full time role at Albany Regional Prison in the
education department teaching art;
(b) he had recently re-engaged in a relationship with his former partner. They
have regular contact over the telephone, and occasional
(c) he had used cannabis previously in custody but not recently and all his
urine tests had returned negative for drugs; and
(d) he had not used alcohol in
to the presentation of the respondent, particularly his mental state, among
other things Dr Petch recorded that there were no
features of mood
disturbance, anxiety or psychosis, that the respondent's insight had developed
since the last interview, and that
recorded that day to day the respondent was looking after his health, managing
his diet, keeping up with activities and
doing exercise. The respondent had
explained to Dr Petch that he needed to exercise vigorously to keep his
anger under
recorded that the respondent read to him a series of statements, some of which
covered topics discussed in his sessions
that the respondent had encountered some difficulties with interruptions to his
counselling with Mr Becker, but had been able to
reflect and continue with
and that the respondent had demonstrated some emotional regulation following an
incident with a fellow
recorded that the respondent had acknowledged that he had been offered a place
on a violence prevention course, but was
of the opinion 'he did not want to do
it in a group because the courses are controlled by gangsters, bikies and drug
dealers who
control what everyone says'. Further he stated that 'he did not want
others to know things about his life' and 'he would have to
go to another jail
to do the course, and he did not want
The respondent's individual management plan dated May 2025 expanded upon the
reasons the respondent did not wish to transfer prisons,
which included not
wanting to leave his employment as an art tutor at Albany Regional
other things, Dr Petch reported that the respondent had described his hopes
for the future, which included being released into
the community and maintaining
a job gardening or tending to lawns. The respondent also reported that he
thought that he may be able
to live with his partner or his sister, although his
preference was to have his own place in Albany. He stated he might use his
compensation
payout from the Baptist Church to set up a gardening business or
The quantum of compensation available to the respondent was estimated and had
not been confirmed as at the date of the
History of offending
summarised the respondent's history of offending in his report at pages 17
to 35. As to the characteristics of the offending
Dr Petch, drawing upon
his previous report dated 17 September 2024, observed that the respondent's
offending history was marked by
multiple instances of domestic violence against
successive intimate partners. This included offending against past and present
burglary into their homes, threats, verbal abuse and extreme physical
to frequency of offending, Dr Petch observed that the respondent's first
conviction was at the age of 12 and he has since had
multiple convictions for a
wide variety of offences. He observed that the respondent has had little regard
for Court imposed protection
orders, police orders or family violence
restraining orders
and had often been
under the influence of alcohol or illicit substances at the time of
Recent behaviour in
to the respondent's recent behaviour in detention, Dr Petch recorded in his
report the matters summarised at [31] to [33]
Psychiatric diagnosis
had examined the respondent previously and had previously proffered his opinion
of the respondent's psychiatric diagnosis.
In the report prepared for the
purpose of this hearing, Dr Petch opined that there was evidence the
respondent suffered from substance
misuse disorder and antisocial personality
disorder. He then explained the basis for that
to the respondent's substance misuse disorder, Dr Petch opined that it was
very severe and enduring; although currently in remission
by virtue of the
respondent being in a controlled prison environment. Among other things,
Dr Petch recorded that since the last hearing
the respondent had reflected
significantly upon the role of alcohol and intoxication, however, substance
misuse was still identified
as a very major determinant in the respondent's risk
of future serious offending. While the reflection the respondent had undertaken
was described as promising, it was noted that it was less certain at this stage
whether this might translate into a meaningful reduction
of the risk of
to the respondent's antisocial personality disorder, Dr Petch opined that
the respondent may have started to reflect on his behaviour
in more meaningful
The positive effects of programmes are likely to have been negligible for [the
respondent], and their effects on reducing his risk
alas next to non-existent.
Dr Petch opined that the respondent's antisocial personality disorder
remained severe and did not appear to have significantly
ameliorated through
Risk assessment
was asked to indicate his assessment of the level of risk that, without a
restriction order, the respondent will commit
a serious offence; and his reasons
for his assessment. In assessing the respondent's risk, Dr Petch recorded
that a structured professional
judgment approach to risk assessment has
consistently been shown to be more reliable than other assessments when
considering violence
risk; that a combination of historical data, clinical
assessment data and structured assessment tools are widely regarded as being
required when attempting to evaluate risk of future violence; and that this
approach can be supplemented by actuarial approaches.
He further noted
These combine theoretical or empirically derived constructs which are predictive
of violence to guide the forecasting of further
violence. Tools do not allow
exact predictions of future violence risk but allows broad predictions of risk
and the identification
of factors which can be potentially managed to reduce any
likelihood of violence.
undertaking the risk assessment, Dr Petch reported that he employed four
tools as part of his assessment of the respondent, described
Dr Petch used the Psychopathy Checklist - Revised (PCL‑R) which was
explained to be a tool that assesses the extent
to which an individual's
personality, traits and behaviours conform to the clinical construct of
psychopathy. Dr Petch acknowledged
that the extent to which the PCL‑R
is valid for use in Western Australian Aboriginal men is not known, and a degree
should be exercised when interpreting the respondent's
scores can range from zero to 40. Dr Petch recorded in his report that the
respondent's amended PCL‑R score was 27, having
previously been recorded
as 32. Dr Petch reported that the respondent's score had, since the last
assessment undertaken, lowered
by five points and was still within the upper
The respondent scored less highly in aspects of the PCL‑R that measure
interpersonal functioning, and scored in the elevated
range for aspects that
measure antisocial
In the course of his evidence, Dr Petch explained that the respondent had
not changed, rather the change of score reflected that
Dr Petch had
undertaken a more detailed consideration of the respondent's personality
characteristics through a cultural lens so
as to exclude the potential for
noted that the respondent's score did not reach the level of psychopathy, but
was nonetheless a high score and a concern
in relation to risk and management in
Dr Petch used the Static‑99R, which I understood to be an actuarial
tool intended to position offenders in terms
of their relative degree of risk
for sexual recidivism based on commonly available demographic and criminal
history information found
to correlate with sexual recidivism in adult male sex
offenders. Dr Petch explained in his report that the Static‑99R's
applicability
to adult male Aboriginal offenders has been established in some
also need to be interpreted with a degree of
recorded that the respondent's Static‑99R score had not changed since his
last assessment. The respondent's score
of seven placed him in the
Level IVb or 'well above average risk' range. Dr Petch also explained
that offenders released with the
same score as the respondent had an average
five year sexual recidivism rate of
HCR-20 (version 3)
Dr Petch used the
which he explained is a reliable semi-structured clinical judgement tool used to
assess the risk for violence. In
his report, Dr Petch acknowledged that the
definition of violence as contained in the HCR‑20v3 manual does not
directly correlate
with the definition of 'serious offence' under the
High Risk Serious Offenders Act
also recorded that this tool is appropriate for males over 18 years,
however has not been specifically validated in males from
an Aboriginal
background.
to the interpretation of the respondent's results, Dr Petch considered the
following historical risk factors as being relevant
to the respondent's future
risk of violence:
his history of
violence; other antisocial behaviour particularly in association with peers or
family members, especially if there
is drug and alcohol use;
relationships;
his employment
substance misuse; his
personality disorder and diagnosis of antisocial personality disorder; traumatic
experiences; violent attitudes;
and treatment or supervision
considered the following clinical risk factors as also being relevant to the
respondent's risk of violence: his problems
with insight; and
instability.
also considered there to be a number of future problems present, particularly
with respect to the respondent's engagement
with professional services and
making plans; his living situation; his personal supports; his treatment or
supervision response;
and his lack of stress or coping
strategies.
Dr Petch used the Risk for Sexual Violence Protocol Version 2
(RSVP‑v2) tool. He described RSVP‑v2 as a tool
designed to identify
static and dynamic risks for future sexual offending, identify treatment needs
and targets, and assist with
developing suitable monitoring and supervision
issues and parameters to address any risks identified.
noted that there were a number of risk factors identified by the RSVP‑v2
associated with an increased risk of future
violent offending that were also
identified when using the HCR‑20v3
reported that he had identified for the respondent seven positive risk factors
using the RSVP that were not considered in
the HCR‑20v3,
the chronicity of his sexual
violence; the diversity of his sexual violence; physical coercion in his sexual
violence; psychological
coercion in his sexual violence; escalation of sexual
violence; extreme minimisation or denial of sexual violence; and attitudes
support or condone sexual
was of the opinion that the number of identified risk factors suggested that the
future risks posed by the respondent may
relate to sexual violence just as much
Risk formulation
described what he considered to be the respondent's risk of offending at
pages 83 to 87 of his report. In this section of
his report, Dr Petch
described the respondent's background as outlined at [21] to [26] of these
reasons and among other things, listed
what he considered to be drivers for the
respondent's offending. Noting that the respondent does not have any mental
illness, Dr
Petch recorded as
Multiple drivers have been identified for his offending:
misuse (normal for him to help with coping and stress);
emotional regulation:
impulsivity;
decision making;
of consequential thinking (especially when stressed, aroused, emotional or
intoxicated);
associates with no pro-social associates;
self-management;
difficulties
in relationships;
factors in the environment with no stable accommodation;
of community supports (other than an antisocial peer group);
structures or purpose to his day;
of stable accommodation;
of employment skills;
life skills to cope in the
to the list reproduced above, when he considered whether the respondent had
adequately addressed the identified risk factors,
Dr Petch's recorded that
while the respondent had attended courses and programs in prison 'he has made
limited treatment gains during
the programs he has attended thus far'.
Dr Petch further opined that this was possibly due to a combination of
limited intrinsic
motivation, poor insight, poor comprehension, perhaps poor
retention of information, and limited problem solving and attention
also recorded in his report that the respondent's use of alcohol and drugs had
been the most serious barrier in preventing
his progress and maintaining his
risk. The programs he had received had not been well tailored to meet his needs
and would probably
have a negligible impact on his offending. However, it was
acknowledged that the respondent may have started to demonstrate some
in his individual treatment with
respondent's inability to engage with previous periods of community supervision
were also identified as a serious concern. Dr
Petch recorded 'He does not
seem to have responded well to the containment provided by previous conditions,
nor the support provided
by supervising
to accommodation, it was reported that the respondent's living situation had
always been precarious with his peer and family group
being unreliable and
substance using.
to whether there were treatment options that Dr Petch considered could
address the factors in the list reproduced at [
] above, he
Some of the risk factors are historical, others clinical and others point
towards future risk management. In my opinion there is
nothing within these risk
assessments or risk formulation above which points to anything other than [the
respondent] posing a high
risk of future serious violence or serious sexual
Risk Scenarios
to risk scenarios, at pages 87 to 89 of his report Dr Petch outlined
five potential scenarios upon the respondent being released
into the community.
Dr Petch considered that the most likely risk scenario for future offending
was largely unchanged from his previous
assessment. The most easily foreseeable
scenario was as
Risk Scenarios
Repeat of recurrent offending
The most easily foreseeable scenario is one which has recurred during most of
his previous periods in the community: this pattern
is simply likely to be
repeated again. On each previous occasion he has returned to the community,
drugs and alcohol rapidly become
central and increasingly influential in his
life. Once these are being used regularly, it has been impossible for him to
their use, and very quickly available funds for their acquisition are
likely to become exhausted. This may require him to resort
to other means to
ensure his daily requirements are met. Some of his previous offending has been
acquisitive.
He has stated that he intends to resume his relationship with a previous
partner, as I understood it previously the partner whom
he assaulted in the
index offence. His current intention relates to his partner with whom he has two
children, but whom he has been
previously convicted of assaulting. This stated
intention betrays several worrying things: a possible denial of the seriousness
his offences and the severity of his violence; a denial of her victimhood and
the impact he has had upon her; his entitlement; his
attitude towards women and
partners in general. He has previously resorted to violence against intimate
partners to manage his relationship.
Whilst intoxicated he does not appear to
have any hesitation in the using of violence which he then justifies. The
violence does
not appear to be planned, although he has armed himself with a
weapon on occasions and used weapons during pervious assaults.
If and when a relationship does develop it is likely to carry inherent risks as
he has been violent to previous long-term partners.
If a relationship ensues it
is likely to lead to further violence, some potentially serious. It may also
lead to sexual violence.
This risk is likely to be extreme if he returns to
using substances. Management of his risk will therefore become significantly
difficult if he develops a further intermittent or permanent
relationship.
If his risk is deemed acceptable and he is made the subject of a supervision
order and returned to the community, the chances are
that services will not be
able to meet all his identified treatment needs. Elements of the package will no
doubt be agreed, but it
is likely that some cannot be funded or delivered. There
are therefore likely to be holes in the support that can be provided - that
gaps between what professionals advise and what can be delivered. If a
supervision order is made, either at this or any subsequent
hearing, a package
will be established that has onerous restrictions, necessary to keep the
community safe. Without the degree of
support that he needs, [the respondent]
may struggle to adhere to the conditions short or long term: he may not remember
not realise what they mean, or if he does, he may ignore than (as he has
in the past in relation to requirements of various orders).
He may struggle with
adapting to the demands of living in the community, and be relatively isolated.
The Department of Justice will
struggle to provide the individual treatment
package that he needs. Without all the support he needs, even if his
accommodation is
stable, this scenario will be borne out if [the respondent]
does not have the necessary will or capacity to prevent an early return
substance misuse. If this occurs, decent into more violent or sexual offending,
some very possibly serious will be likely to follow.
the heading 'An ideal scenario', Dr Petch outlined in his report an
alternative and more optimistic scenario (one that he deemed
far less likely to
occur). This would be characterised by the respondent's engagement with an
extensive community program that was
supportive and fully met his needs. He
would spend his days meaningfully, developing skills to take on safe employment
and routine.
Dr Petch opined he
strongly suspected this scenario to be least likely of all to be
also outlined in his report what he considered to be the 'Three worse
scenarios'.
These were scenarios where before leaving prison on a supervision order, the
Violence Prevention program was required to be undertaken
by the respondent. In
these scenarios the program was not available; the program was not effective and
the respondent remained in
custody on a continuing detention order; or the
respondent was released but was not provided with the necessary support and
package, resulting in his risk rising rapidly, 'because without
support, [the respondent's] treatment gains would swiftly be lost
and he would
revert to his baseline of (high)
to the respondent residing with an intimate partner upon release, in summary
Dr Petch's evidence was that he thought that would
give rise to legitimate
concerns, as the psychological work required to be done for the respondent to
manage an intimate relationship
had not been completed, and the respondent had
in the past offended against intimate
He expressed concern that the respondent was not yet able to manage his emotions
in the context of an intimate partner
relationship.
Opinion and
recommendation
his report Dr Petch recorded that having undertaken a risk assessment using
a variety of instruments of different types (actuarial
and structured
professional judgment, as well as his clinical opinion), it was his opinion that
the respondent posed a high level
of risk to the community of further serious
offending of a violent or sexual nature, within the meaning of the
High Risk Serious Offenders
to risk posed by the respondent, Dr Petch recorded that the respondent's
risk of reoffending was associated with the presence
his antisocial personality disorder,
and his substance misuse disorders (currently in remission as he is in custody).
Dr Petch also
noted that the respondent's propensity to commit a serious
offence was substantially driven by intoxication, and if that could be
his overall risk would likely be moderated. However, he was of the opinion that
the respondent still lacked the capacity
to control his behaviour and his
substance misuse in the community, even if a full package of support was
outlined a series of factors that were modifiable and relevant to the management
of the respondent's risk, these included
the development of insight; instability
with regard to his accommodation, job, relationship and peer group associations;
professional
services and plans; his living situation and personal supports;
treatment and his response to supervision; stress or coping difficulties;
substance misuse. He was of the opinion that once there were adequate treatment
plans in place for each of these items the risk
would be reduced as much as is
the Court release the respondent on a supervision order, Dr Petch outlined
a number of recommendations as to monitoring, treatment,
supervision and victim
safety at pages 94 to 96 of his report. His recommendations are reproduced
Monitoring Strategies
These are required to ensure there is early detection of warning signs should
the risk start to escalate. They include:
reporting requirements to his CCO;
visits to his home environment to ensure his accommodation is appropriate;
of the extent of alcohol and drug use occurring in or around the home;
drug and alcohol testing (and a requirement to provide valid samples when
of electronic devices as required to monitor his location;
to restriction zones for victim protection, interactions and associations;
requirement that he disclose his existing and new relationships to his CCO;
evaluation of the status of those relationships and safety of the
The CCO will need to be highly active, and remind [the respondent] of his
reporting obligations, and engage with his supporting team
to ensure they are
aware of his reporting appointments and ensure that he can and does attend.
Treatment Strategies
Irrespective of the outcome of the restriction order application hearing, I and
many others have identified some unmet treatment
needs which in my view would be
of potential benefit to [the respondent]. These are particularly relevant
because they would also
be likely to reduce his risk for future offending. They
individual therapy with a clinical psychologist, particularly to address his
history of trauma and his previous violence.
In my view if he is required to
remain in custody, if he is deemed suitable for it, it would be unreasonable for
this not to be delivered
to him. If he is able to return to the community, there
may be community-based resources available for this to be delivered. Such
program might promote more pro-social attitudes and assist him in developing
alternative strategies when he is facing difficulties
to an alcohol rehabilitation programme. This would only be of value of it was
tailored to meet his cognitive capacities.
This could be prison based,
residential or community-based. It would need to cover relapse prevention,
coping skills, anger management,
stress management. It would be more likely to
be completed if it was provided on a residential basis, but community-based
alternatives
might available. It would need to create links between his
substance misuse, early traumatic experiences and offending. It would
provide ongoing relapse prevention strategies. Some of this work could be
incorporated into his individual program, but I
think additional support in the
community regarding alcohol relapse prevention will be required.
Supervision Strategies
It would be likely to reduce his risk of relapse if he was required to remove
himself from the company of, or not associate with,
any person who had drugs or
alcohol, was suspected of having drugs or alcohol or anyone who was using or
suspected of using drugs
or alcohol. There needs to be a complete abstinence of
drugs and alcohol. Not entering licenced premises seems to be sensible.
This may be difficult to achieve if his family with whom he has close contact
still use drugs and alcohol in his presence. This needs
to be carefully
considered by the court as these conditions might set him up to fail, but if it
is not included, this may expose
the community to greater risk.
Victim Safety Planning
This would depend on management of his offending in the community in general.
Consideration should be given to requiring him to disclose
any intimate
relationship. The Department should consider disclosing to any new partner his
previous history of violence to his previous
partners, his breaches of previous
VROs, offering her a warning, and providing her with strategies to protect
herself should she
have concerns. This could include a duress distress alarm
system linked to local police so that they can attend rapidly should she
consider she is in danger, alerting them for the need for a very rapid response
should she require assistance, and the provision
of a place of safety to be
rapidly accessed should the need arise. If she has children, the Department of
Communities should undertake
an assessment. He may need relationship counselling
on an ongoing basis to assist him with the maintenance of social skills
to successfully negotiate such a relationship without the need to
resort to violence.
was Dr Petch's evidence that it would still be very difficult to adequately
manage the respondent's risk in the community even
if appropriate supervision
conditions were put in place and interventions were made to reduce the risk. His
concerns related to the
ongoing absence of any clear proposal for stable
accommodation and a lack of provision of a community support provider who would
be able to offer the support that the respondent
also gave evidence that there were many unmodifiable risk factors relevant to
the respondent's offending, which will remain
whatever interventions are put in
place. These were identified
antisocial behaviour;
Relationships;
Employment;
Personality disorder (anti-social personality disorder);
or supervision response;
of sexual violence;
coercion in sexual violence;
Psychological
coercion in sexual violence;
minimisation or denial of sexual violence;
that support or condone sexual violence.
to programs, Dr Petch opined that if the respondent was to remain subject
to a continuing detention order, the more treatment
that the respondent can do
psychologically, the better. Undertaking the Violence Prevention program was
recommended, and ideally,
such a program would be made available to those in
Albany Regional
Dr Petch also opined that the respondent repeating the Pathways program
would be beneficial, consolidating his previous
He suggested that the respondent's suitability to participate in such programs
Psychological and other
assessments -
Ms Selby's treatment
progress report
Selby is a forensic psychologist in the Forensic Psychological Assessment Team
within the Department of Justice and author of
the report dated
30 September 2025. This report was prepared to provide a summary of the
respondent's treatment thus far, an update
on the respondent's treatment
progress since 29 October 2024, and to identify any recommendations in
relation to future treatment.
Ms Selby was not called to give evidence at
the review hearing, and the opinions expressed in her report were not the
cross‑examination.
Selby recorded that in preparing her report she reviewed the first volume of the
book of materials, interviewed the respondent
via video link for the period
of approximately 95 minutes, and corresponded with Mr Mackie from the
Community Offender Monitoring
Unit, and Mr Becker and Mr Lockhart from
the Forensic Psychological Intervention
Treatment history and
the first part of her report, Ms Selby set out the factual background. She
included an extensive outline of the respondent's treatment
history and his
response to treatment as recorded in various assessment reports prepared for the
purposes of various Court
proceedings.
She also described the respondent's recent behaviour while subject to
Selby noted that the respondent's participation in programmatic intervention had
generally been described as disruptive, oppositional,
and at times aggressive,
but despite this he was considered to have made emerging gains in each program.
In her report, Ms Selby
noted that the respondent had refused to
participate in violent offending treatment programs in 2025 and on at least two
prior occasions,
in 2020 and 2022.
to the respondent's treatment progress, Ms Selby noted that the respondent
had engaged in treatment with psychologist Mr Becker.
She recorded that
between 2 September 2024 and 1 September 2025, the respondent had
attended 19 sessions with Mr Becker. She noted
that although the
respondent appeared initially to be disinterested, bored, and unmotivated to
attend these sessions, he later developed
a rapport with Mr Becker.
Regarding these sessions, Ms Selby reported that the respondent had been
able been able to briefly link
concepts discussed in sessions to hypothetical
future offending situations, however direct discussions regarding offending and
pathways had been superficial in nature and many key criminogenic issues
were yet to be
The respondent's account of
treatment progress
Selby also outlined the respondent's own account of his treatment progress. She
recorded that the respondent had identified four
main areas of focus in his
sessions: family relationships, release plans, his relationship with his current
partner, and goals for
the future. She also recorded that the respondent had
identified that alcohol consumption, negative peer associations, and excessive
leisure time were his primary risk factors for
reoffending.
paragraphs 22 and 23 of her report, Ms Selby addressed the
respondent's relationship with his partner. She recorded that the respondent
unable to describe what aspects of his relationship he had been working on in
sessions with Mr Becker, and had indicated that
the mutual use of drugs and
alcohol were to blame for his previous offending against
regard to sex, she recorded that the respondent had reported to her that this
was not really important to him
While the respondent acknowledged there were some things he was not proud of,
she also noted that he had denied any sexual
Further, the respondent reflected on his past participation in the Intensive Sex
Offender Treatment Program and stated he had no
interest in completing any
additional treatment programs, including the Violence Prevention
Release plans
to accommodation, the respondent reported that he planned to live with his
partner who resided with her adult son and her 10 year
She also recorded that she had been advised by Mr Mackie, the respondent's
community corrections officer, that such accomodation
proposal was unlikely to
be approved and that there were no viable accommodation options for the
respondent aside from private rental
properties.
respondent reported to Ms Selby that he was confident he could find a job
or set up his own garden maintenance business. In the
event that the supervision
order was imposed and the respondent was to reside in the Busselton area, it was
noted that the respondent
may be able to access reintegration supports through
Accordwest.
Opinions and
recommendations
to treatment progress, Ms Selby recorded that the respondent appeared to
have built a positive therapeutic relationship with Mr
Becker and had
increased willingness to engage in the therapeutic process. She recorded that he
had demonstrated an emerging ability
to apply new distress tolerance skills, but
he had not yet
addressed his alcohol and
drug use, intimate partner relationships, or offending history and has found it
difficult to apply concepts
discussed in sessions to his past offending
Ms Selby further opined that any insight into his offending was often
readily undercut by defensive statements, denial, and distorted
Selby proffered a number of recommendations in her report under the heading
'Future Management'. In the event the respondent's
continuing detention order
was affirmed, Ms Selby recommended ongoing intervention with Mr Becker
in relation to the respondent;
that the respondent engage in the Violence
Prevention program;
that continued
support in his current role as peer tutor in the art department of Albany
Regional Prison be provided, as this was
a significant prosocial outlet; and
regular urinalysis and breath
the event that a supervision order was imposed Ms Selby recommended ongoing
intervention with Mr Becker and strict external controls,
including regular
urinalysis and breath testing. Ms Selby recommended that there be
reinforcement of any supervision conditions the
respondent may be placed on,
which may include the implementation of immediate consequences for
non-compliance.
Community supervision
assessment report
noted above Mr Mackie is a senior community corrections officer within
Community Offender Monitoring Unit of the Department of
Justice, and the author
of and one of four signatories to the community supervision assessment report
dated 17 October 2025. He took
carriage of the respondent's case management
on 11 August 2025 and for the purposes of this application prepared a
community supervision
assessment report.
undertaking his assessment, Mr Mackie recorded that his sources of
information included his interviews with the respondent; contact
proposed accommodation sponsor; various Department of Justice records; the first
volume of the book of materials; Mr Luke
Carmichael's treatment options
report dated 30 April and 24 September 2024; Dr Petch's report
dated 30 September 2025; Ms Selby's
report dated 30 September
2025; and information gained from Mr Mackie having liaised with each of the
report providers, the victim
engagement unit, WA Police, Accordwest, Pivot
support services, the Department of Housing and Works, the Department of
Communities,
Mr Becker and from reviewing the Department of Justice
the first part of his report, Mr Mackie described the background to the
application. In this regard, there was significant repetition
in the materials
before the Court. I do not repeat here Mr Mackie's summary of the
respondent's offending, performance on his continuing
detention order,
programmatic intervention and prison behaviour. Nor do I repeat Mr Mackie's
summary of the evidence that was before
the Court on 29 October
Accommodation
Mackie recorded that the respondent proposed to reside with his 'on/off partner
of the last
It was recorded that the respondent had maintained contact with her throughout
his last sentence and his continuing detention order,
however she was also a
past victim of the respondent's
assessment of a property in which the respondent's partner was residing was
undertaken. At the time the respondent's partner lived
in a Department of
Housing and Works property. After liaising with the Department of Communities -
Child Protection and Family Support,
Mr Mackie noted that the (then)
residence of the respondent's partner would have been unsuitable owing to the
care arrangements of
grandchildren, who were often living in the home. Further,
it was noted that the respondent's son (who had recently been released
prison and was previously residing at the property), may come to live there. The
respondent had informed Mr Mackie that substance
use involving his adult
child was a possible
that assessment was undertaken, the respondent's partner moved to a smaller home
in Busselton. There was concern expressed
that overcrowding in this property
would add another layer of
complexity.
respondent's long term plan was to reside in Albany. He informed Mr Mackie
that he had submitted a public housing application
with a preference for
Katanning. Mr Mackie reported that public housing in this area was 'not a
realistic prospect within the next
four years or
was also reported that Pivot support services in Albany advised they could not
provide transnational housing options to the respondent
due to his high risk
serious offender status (being outside of the scope of their current
Mackie in his report noted that the ongoing transitional accommodation and
professional reintegration support contract for male
high risk serious offenders
with sexual convictions was held by Uniting WA. The respondent would need to be
prepared to relocate
in prison and undertake a six month assessment with Uniting
WA (who did not engage with prisoners in Albany), who would then determine
suitability for transitional
accommodation.
Mackie recorded that the respondent has no confirmed
employment.
He also noted that Pivot support services have potential employment options in
garden maintenance should the respondent be released
and reside in the Albany
area. This would require approval from the program manager and was subject to a
assessment.
He recorded that the respondent had also expressed an interest in starting his
own garden maintenance
was recorded that without confirmation of viable accommodation, the victim
engagement unit had been unable to confirm any victim
Treatment needs and
proposed conditions
Mackie described in his report the treatment needs and behaviours of the
respondent that would require management should he be
released from custody on a
supervision order, as had been identified by Dr Petch, together with the
strategies suggested by him to
manage the respondent's offending
behaviours.
the Court was to make a supervision order, Mr Mackie described
64 possible supervision order conditions. They included a residence
condition; conditions which would facilitate treatment; facilitate monitoring of
movements and associations; conditions that would
restrict contact with victims;
allow for the imposition of a curfew; and focus on the prevention of high risk
situations.
Mackie recorded that the respondent's situation remained largely unchanged in
the time following the hearing on 29 October 2024.
Further, he was yet to
propose suitable accommodation, remained unwilling to transfer prisons to
facilitate engagement with a transitional
service which could offer transitional
accommodation, nor to engage in programmatic intervention as encouraged by the
He recorded that some progress had been made in the respondent's individual
psychological counselling however significant treatment
needs remained
unaddressed.
Ms Bennetts,
who had been the respondent's community corrections officer before
Mr Mackie, gave evidence at the review hearing. In
the course of her
evidence Ms Bennetts explained and expanded upon aspects of
Mr Mackie's report. Among other things, Ms Bennetts
explained the
limits to treatment and accommodation options available to the respondent if he
was to elect to remain at Albany Regional
Past reports
book of materials contained various additional reports and assessments, which
had been prepared for the purpose of other Court
proceedings, and I had regard
to the same. This included the previous report prepared by Dr Petch dated
17 September 2024, and a
report prepared by another forensic psychologist,
Dr Dylan Galloghly, dated 16 September 2024.
reports record the respondent's antecedents and criminal history and provide
some context to his offending. There is significant
repetition in the reports
and it is not necessary for me to describe each report in
Analysis and findings
was acknowledged by Kiefel CJ, Deane and Stewart JJ in
Garlett v The State of
Western Australia
at [67], it is, no doubt, true to say that the
evaluative task required of the Court under
High Risk Serious Offenders Act
requires balancing, on the one hand, the level of the
risk identified (that is, the probability of the commission of the specified
serious offence) together with the magnitude of the harm associated with that
risk with, on the other hand, the burden that would
be placed upon the liberty
of the offender by a restriction order for an offence that they have not
The evaluative task required of the Court on a review under
High Risk Serious Offenders Act
an offender's detention is no less difficult.
the disposition of this application, I had regard to Dr Petch's opinion
that the respondent continued to be at high risk of committing
a serious offence
if not subject to a continuing detention order or a supervision order under the
High Risk Serious Offenders Act
to Dr Petch's opinion that it would still be very difficult to adequately
manage the respondent's risk in the community even
if appropriate supervision
conditions were put in place and interventions made to reduce the
the opinions expressed by Dr Petch and Ms Selby were weighed in the
balance (bearing in mind that they have an area of expertise
not shared by the
Court), their reports and Dr Petch's evidence were only part of the
evidence before the Court. In this context,
the weight to be accorded to a
report of an expert will depend upon its cogency and reliability, when
considered in light of the
whole of the evidence.
noted above, counsel for the respondent did not seek to persuade the Court that
the respondent did not remain a high risk serious
offender within the meaning of
High Risk Serious Offenders Act
The position adopted by the respondent was not of course the end of the matter.
It is well established, and I proceeded on the basis,
that the responsibility
for deciding whether or not the offender is a high risk serious offender (as
defined) and, if so, what order
should be made is that of the judge
The risk that, if the
offender were not to remain subject to a restriction order, the offender would
commit a serious offence
considering whether the respondent remains a high risk serious offender, regard
must be had to the risk that, if the respondent
were not to remain subject to a
restriction order, he would commit a serious offence:
This calls for
a conclusion or findings based on the matters listed in
(g) and (j).
acceptable and cogent evidence, I was satisfied that the State had established
to a high degree of probability that there remained
a high risk that upon
release, if not subject to a restriction order, the respondent would commit
further violent or sexual offences
particularly in the context of broader
coercive control in domestic relationships and/or while using
substances.
was also satisfied that such offending of a violent or sexual nature would have
immediate and long term consequences for the victim.
In so finding, I had
particular regard to the following:
(a) the respondent's history of offending, particularly that the respondent had
committed a number of very serious sexual offences
against his domestic partners
and women more generally.
Women were the
victim in 18 offences for which the respondent had been convicted, albeit only
one of the respondent's 'serious offences'
was committed against an intimate
(b) the respondent had been subject to eight separate periods of community
supervision between 1989 and 2016, and his compliance
had been mixed. In the
last year, he had been the subject of one charge and seven further incidents
while detained subject to a continuing
detention order;
(c) the respondent has a propensity to commit serious sexual and violent
(d) the respondent has significant outstanding treatment needs, which include a
need to address his alcohol and drug use, intimate
partner relationships and
offending history;
(e) in the past the respondent's social network has been antisocial and drug
using, although he does have some support from his partner,
who was a victim of
his offending; and
(f) although not determinative, the psychiatric evidence before the Court at the
review hearing supported the finding that there
remained a high risk of the
respondent committing further serious offences if a restriction order was not
affirmed. I weighed the
opinion of Dr Petch in the balance, together with
the other assessments (including earlier assessments) that were
Is the risk that the
respondent will commit a serious offence unacceptable?
proceeded on the basis that the Court was not free to characterise as
'unacceptable' any level of risk which it should choose.
Rather, an evaluation
of the level of risk according to the objects of the
High Risk Serious Offender
was required, informed by the need
to ensure adequate protection for the
regard to the evidence, I was satisfied that the respondent continued to pose a
risk that remained 'unacceptable'. I weighed
in the balance my findings as to
the matters prescribed in s 7(3)(a) ‑ (g) and (j). I particularly had
regard to the nature
of the risk posed to the community by the respondent given
the gravity and nature of the serious offence the respondent was likely
commit; the likelihood of the respondent committing a serious offence; and the
consequences to the respondent of a finding being
made that an unacceptable risk
exists, which are discussed in more detail
The nature of the risk
posed to the community
considering whether the respondent posed a risk to the community that is
'unacceptable', I considered the gravity and nature of
the serious offence the
respondent is likely to commit and the risk to the community that type of
offending poses. Among other things,
I was informed by the 'risk scenarios'
identified and discussed by Dr Petch.
accepted Dr Petch's evidence as to the nature of the risk posed to victims.
As Dr Petch opined, physical and sexual harm may occur
if and when the
respondent develops a relationship. This risk is severe if he returns to using
substances. The violent acts of the
respondent do not appear to have been
planned, although the respondent has armed himself and used weapons on previous
regard to all of the evidence, I considered that the risk posed by the
respondent to be significant and grave. On each previous
occasion that the
respondent had returned to the community, drugs and alcohol rapidly became
central and influential in his life
and his reoffending. I considered that the
most appropriate characterisation of the risk posed to the community by the
to be the risk that the respondent would commit further serious
violent or sexual offences towards women, overpowering them through
violence and threats, in a highly agitated and intoxicated state.
was also satisfied that such offending would have a high probability of
immediate and long-term psychological consequences for
the victim, and a high
probability of physical injury and the possibility of
The likelihood of the
respondent offending
considering whether the respondent posed a risk that is 'unacceptable', I also
considered the likelihood of the respondent offending.
I considered the
likelihood of the respondent committing a serious offence of a violent or sexual
nature to be high. I was satisfied
of the same having weighed all of the
evidence, including the following.
the respondent has a significant history of serious violent offending, including
committing acts of sexual violence against
the respondent has significant unmet treatment needs. As Dr Petch opined,
the respondent's risk of offending is associated
with the presence of antisocial
personality disorder and substance use disorder. The respondent has, presently,
few sober and prosocial
the respondent's offending history and diagnosis readily permit the inference to
be made that the respondent has a propensity
or tendency to sexually or
violently offend. This propensity is substantially driven by intoxication.
although not determinative, I weighed the opinion of Dr Petch in the
balance when I evaluated the likelihood of the respondent
reoffending.
Dr Petch opined that there was a high likelihood of the respondent
reoffending by the commission of a serious offence
of a violent or sexual nature
to a domestic partner.
The consequences to the
respondent of making a finding that an unacceptable risk exists
was cognisant that upon the restriction order being affirmed, serious
consequences would be visited upon the respondent.
the Court could not be assured that the respondent would participate in
treatment to address the cause or causes of his offending
behaviour if, upon the
restriction order being affirmed, the respondent was to remain subject to a
continuing detention order.
noted above, the respondent was one year ago encouraged to participate in
individual counselling and in conjunction, be referred
to participate in the
Violence Prevention program. The respondent had not participated in any such
program since the imposition of
the continuing detention order in October 2024.
This was a consequence of the program not being available at Albany Regional
and the respondent's refusal to transfer to another prison. No Violence
Prevention program is scheduled at Albany Regional Prison
the respondent was to remain subject to a continuing detention order, and
maintain his strong preference to remain in Albany Regional
Prison, the
inability to demonstrate that he had addressed the cause or causes of his
offending behaviour while subject to a continuing
detention order might (again)
curtail his ability to demonstrate to the requisite standard that he will
substantially comply with
the standard conditions of a supervision order.
the respondent's desire to be released from detention was clear,
a supervision order would (at
least at the outset) significantly restrict the respondent's ability to interact
and engage in the community.
His social network in the community previously,
including peers and family, had been antisocial and drug using. At the review
on 6 November 2025 there was a lack of appropriate accommodation
options before the Court. The respondent had expressed a wish to
live with his
partner, however this was not assessed as being suitable. If the restriction
order was affirmed, the respondent would
not readily be able to return to living
at his preferred residence.
the respondent was described as highly institutionalised and the issue of future
accommodation created uncertainty regarding
the level of support he could be
expected to receive on a supervision order. The respondent was unwilling to
change his custodial
location so as to engage with the Uniting WA transitional
accommodation program.
the respondent reported a desire to gain employment and had performed well in
roles within a detention setting. If the restriction
order was affirmed and he
was released subject to a supervision order, the restrictions imposed would
likely further curtail the
already limited employment opportunities available to
the respondent.
determining whether the risk posed by the respondent remained 'unacceptable', I
weighed in the balance the gravity and nature
of the risk posed by the
respondent and the likelihood of that risk materialising on the one hand, and
the serious consequences for
the respondent on the other (described above). I
did so having regard to the need to ensure adequate protection for the
risk posed by the respondent (a risk that he would upon release commit a serious
offence of a sexual or violent nature), has
the potential to cause immediate and
long term adverse psychological consequences for the victim, and also serious
injury, fear and
trauma, with the possibility of death. I considered the
posed to the community to be grave,
having regard to, among other things, the respondent's previous pattern of and
propensity for
serious offending. As to the likelihood of the risk
materialising, for the reasons set out above, I was satisfied that the
of serious offending was high.
all of these matters in the balance and the need to ensure adequate protection
for the community, I was satisfied to a high
degree of probability that the
respondent continued to pose a risk that was
'unacceptable'.
If the risk remains
unacceptable, is it necessary to affirm the restriction order to ensure adequate
community protection against
a risk that the offender will commit a serious
legislative scheme requires that regard be had to the need to protect members of
the community from the risk: s 7(3)(i). Again,
this called for a conclusion
or findings based on the matters listed in s 7(3)(a) ‑ (g) and
was cognisant that a finding of unacceptable risk was not determinative of a
restriction order application, and the Court might
find that it was not
necessary to make a restriction order to adequately protect the community
notwithstanding that it had found
that the risk of future offending was
unacceptable.
in this case the restriction order was not affirmed, the respondent would be
released and would not be subject to any order, condition
supervision. This was a consequence
that weighed heavily in the balance.
regard to all matters specified in
High Risk Serious Offenders Act
which I refer in these reasons, and notwithstanding that the respondent had
already been punished for the offences he committed,
I was satisfied to a high
degree of probability that the risk of the respondent committing a serious
offence of the type identified
by the State was unacceptable, and that it was
necessary to make a continuing detention order or a supervision order in
to the respondent to ensure adequate protection of the community
against the risk. That is, I found that if the respondent did not
remain subject
to a restriction order, the community would not be adequately protected against
the unacceptable risk that he will
commit a serious offence. It follows that I
found that the respondent remained a high risk serious offender and that it was
to affirm the restriction order.
Should the continuing
detention order be affirmed or should it be rescinded and a supervision order
decided that the respondent remained a high risk serious offender, I proceeded
on the basis that I was required to either
affirm the continuing detention order
or, subject to
, rescind the continuing detention order and make a
supervision
I was cognisant that if the Court finds that an offender remains a high risk
serious offender, it is not invested with a residual
discretion to decline to
make a restriction
considering whether a supervision order would adequately protect the community,
it was necessary to take into account any conditions
which could be placed on
the respondent by operation of a supervision order so as to ensure adequate
protection of the community,
the respondent's rehabilitation, care and
treatment, and to ensure the adequate protection of complainants of offences
respondent.
I was also required to be satisfied on the balance of probabilities, that
the respondent would substantially comply with the standard
conditions of the
order as required under
Risk Serious Offenders Act
This required me to be satisfied that the
respondent would comply with the standard conditions in a manner and to an
extent that
would ensure the adequate protection of
community from the unacceptable risk
of the respondent committing a serious
The standard conditions are those contained in
High Risk Serious Offenders Act
include reporting, supervision and electronic monitoring. The onus was on the
respondent to satisfy the Court that he would so
I have noted above, even if the Court was satisfied that the respondent would
substantially comply with the standard conditions
of a supervision order, the
Court would be required to affirm the continuing detention order if it was not
satisfied that conditional
release under a supervision order would ensure an
adequate degree of protection to the community. That is, in deciding whether to
affirm the continuing detention order or to rescind it and make a supervision
order, the paramount consideration was the need to
ensure adequate protection of
Further, I proceeded on the basis that I was required to choose the order
that was the least invasive to the respondent's liberty
while ensuring an
adequate degree of protection for the community.
for the effluxion of time, the position of the respondent at the determination
of the review application was not markedly different
from the restriction order
hearing of 29 October 2024.
consistent with the previous findings recorded
The State of Western
Australia v Rodd [No 2]
, when I independently weighed the evidence
led in the course of this review hearing I considered that the respondent's risk
of reoffending
could not be adequately managed in the community. In so
determining, I weighed the following in the balance.
had regard to the opinion expressed by Dr Petch. It was Dr Petch's
evidence and it remained his opinion that it would still be
very difficult to
adequately manage the respondent's risk in the community even if appropriate
supervision conditions were put in
place and interventions made to reduce the
Dr Petch's opinion was well reasoned and he expressed concern regarding the
ongoing absence of a clear proposal for stable accommodation
and a lack of
community support.
weighed in the balance that the respondent had unmet treatment needs and had not
sufficiently addressed his alcohol and drug use,
intimate partner relationships,
or offending history. However, the respondent had made some gains with respect
to his individual
sessions with Mr Becker. Ms Selby recorded that the
respondent had expressed an increased willingness and motivation to engage in
the therapeutic
I noted that the respondent had declined to move from Albany Regional Prison to
undertake the Violence Prevention program when it
was offered on 4 December
2024. However, I accepted the evidence of Dr Petch that the respondent was
fatigued from such programmatic
intervention.
His reticence was readily explained by his institutionalised state and desire to
remain in Albany Regional Prison, where he was gainfully
occupied in the art
department.
accepted the evidence of Dr Petch that upon undertaking several risk
assessments there was nothing that pointed to anything other
than the respondent
posing a high risk of future serious violence or serious sexual
also weighed in the balance the respondent's mixed history of compliance with
community based orders and parole. I accepted that
in the past the respondent
had breached multiple orders, suggesting a lack of concern about abiding by
Court or police directions.
I weighed his recent behaviour in prison, but was
cognisant that all bar one breach had not resulted in charges.
had been the case in October 2024, if released on a supervision order, suitable
stable accommodation in the community was not
available to the respondent. I
accepted that the accommodation proposed by the respondent was not suitable. I
had regard to the evidence
that PIVOT were not a suitable provider of
transitional accommodation and that unless the respondent was willing to change
his custodial
location, Uniting WA was not an option for the provision of
transitional
accommodation.
the absence of suitable, stable accommodation I adopted the position recorded at
The State of
Western Australia v Rodd [No 2]
In any event, in this case, the lack of suitable, stable accommodation was an
insurmountable hurdle for the respondent. The absence
of suitable, stable
accommodation made it impossible to be satisfied that the supervision order was
a viable option. The risk to
the community of the respondent committing a
serious offence, and the protection of the community could not be assured by the
respondent's
release on a supervision order, and I accepted the State's
submission that at this point in time, the only appropriate order was
continuing detention order.
said, I accepted that this was not just an accommodation
When I gave full weight to all of the matters outlined above, and took into
account the constraints that would be imposed on the
respondent by the standard
conditions specified in
and the other 'non‑standard' conditions of the supervision order as
proposed by Mr Mackie, I was not satisfied to the requisite
f the respondent were released on a
supervision order that he would not commit a serious offence, that is, a serious
sexual or violent
had opined that should the respondent be released into the community the
continuation of individual treatment may mitigate
to some degree his risk of
reoffending as it would promote prosocial attitudes and develop alternate coping
mechanisms. Further,
a referral to alcohol rehabilitation would provide ongoing
assistance in preventing relapse. Dr Petch expressed the need for strict
monitoring and supervision strategies to detect early signs of offending
I accepted this to be the case.
Dr Petch also acknowledged that there were many unmodifiable risk factors
which had also been identified as relevant to
the respondent's offending which
factors are reproduced at [
these reasons. These will remain whatever interventions are put in place.
was also recorded by Dr Petch, the respondent's need for support in the
community is likely to be significant. The respondent
institutionalized and has found previous community living very difficult and has
not managed it for long without resorting
to high risk
behaviours.
While the proposed supervision conditions focussed on control, there was little
evidence of what, if any, social interaction and
supports might be made
available to the respondent.
Unfortunately,
given the respondent's history of offending, outstanding treatment needs, lack
of prosocial supports, and lack of
suitable accommodation, I was not satisfied
that a supervision order would provide sufficient protection for the community.
of the circumstances, I made a continuing detention
Conclusion and
recommendation
weighing the submissions of counsel in light of all of the evidence adduced, I
was satisfied that the respondent remained a
high risk serious offender within
the meaning of the
High Risk Serious
Offenders Act
; and that the continuing detention order ought be affirmed
pursuant to
s 68(1)(b)(i).
In the end, after regard was given to all of the
evidence, I was left in doubt as to whether a supervision order would adequately
protect the community.
with the recommendations made at the conclusion of the restriction order hearing
in October 2024, going forward the respondent
ought be encouraged to continue to
engage in individual counselling. Targeted intervention should also be deployed
so as to address
the respondent's misuse of alcohol and drugs and his history of
violence, including sexual violence. As was noted in the course of
hearing, engagement in a group program targeted at addressing violence
prevention will most likely require the respondent
to be transferred to Bunbury
Regional Prison (or another prison in the Metropolitan area).
light of the stability, routine and constructive engagement that the respondent
has felt he has achieved while at Albany Regional
Prison, consideration ought be
given as to whether the respondent might be able to be transferred from Albany
Regional Prison for
only that period of time required for him to undertake the
Violence Prevention program and be assessed by Uniting WA, and then be
to Albany Regional Prison. The respondent should also be assessed as to his
suitability to again undertake the Pathways
program (not in substitution for
participation in the Violence Prevention program and individual intervention,
but in addition to
attempts should be made prior to the next review hearing to identify: community
supports (that might lessen the respondent's
difficulties in adjusting to the
community, which has been identified as a recidivism risk factor for the
respondent); whether there
might be an appropriate employment opportunity for
the respondent; and a viable accommodation option for the respondent so that if
he makes sufficient treatment gains and is found to be suitable for release on a
supervision order, the absence of accommodation
will not prevent this from
to accommodation, in the course of the review hearing counsel for the State
suggested that going forward, the respondent ought
explore accommodation options
that do not involve him residing with an intimate partner immediately upon
release on a supervision
order, and noted that the State's position would
unlikely change at any future review hearing if the respondent was to propose
accommodation.
It would be prudent for the respondent to give this foreshadowed indication of
position of the State due weight in his planning going
certify that the preceding paragraph(s) comprise the reasons for decision of the
Supreme Court of Western Australia.
Associate to the Honourable
Justice Strk
12 NOVEMBER 2025
ts 174, 218 (6 November
Applicant's outline of submissions filed on 3 November 2025, par
High Risk Serious Offenders Act
Garlett v The State of
Western Australia
[2022] HCA 30
(2022) 277 CLR 1
(Edelman J), citing
Bell v State of
[2021] HCA 42
(2021) 96 ALJR 22
(2021) 395 ALR 589
Gleeson JJ).
Garlett v The State of
Western Australia
[220] (Edelman
High Risk Serious Offenders Act
The State of Western
Australia v Pendleton
[2023] WASC 267
[51], [224] ‑
High Risk Serious Offenders Act
High Risk Serious Offenders Act
ts 174 (6 November
ts 213 (6 November
As observed by McGrath J in
The State of Western
Australia v UJG [No 2]
[2023] WASC 77
Again, as observed by McGrath J in
The State of Western
Australia v UJG [No 2]
[36], referring to the
High Risk Serious Offenders Act
Exhibit 2, book of materials volume 2, page 373 (Psychiatric Report of
Dr Edward Petch dated 30 September
Exhibit 2, book of materials volume 2, page 374 (Psychiatric Report of
Dr Edward Petch dated 30 September 2025); ts 178 (6 November
Exhibit 2, book of materials volume 2, page 374 (Psychiatric Report of
Dr Edward Petch dated 30 September
Exhibit 2, book of materials vol 2, page 465 (Community Supervision Assessment
Report of Mr Paul Mackie dated 17 October 2025); ts
200 - 201 (6 November
Exhibit 1, book of materials vol 1, pages 2 - 17 (Respondent's Western
Australian criminal
Exhibit 1, book of materials vol 1, pages 18 - 22 (Chronology of offending
prepared by the State Solicitor's
Exhibit 2, book of materials vol 2, page 400 (Psychiatric Report of
Dr Edward Petch dated
30 September 2025).
Exhibit 2, book of materials vol 2, page 358 (Treatment Progress Report of Ms
Emma Selby dated 30 September
Exhibit 2, book of materials volume 2, page 401
(Psychiatric Report of Dr Edward Petch dated 30 September 2025); page
464 (Community
Supervision Assessment Report of Mr Paul Mackie dated
The State of Western
Australia v Bellamy
[2013] WASC 467
[70] (Simmonds J), citing
Director of Public
Prosecutions for Western Australia v McGarry
[2009] WASC
Applicant's outline of submissions filed on 3 November 2025, par
Applicant's outline of submissions filed on 3 November 2025, par
Exhibit 2, book of materials vol 2, page 454 (Psychiatric Report of
Dr Edward Petch dated
30 September 2025).
Exhibit 2, book of materials vol 2, page 358 (Treatment Progress Report of Ms
Emma Selby dated 30 September
Exhibit 2, book of materials vol 2, pages 358 - 359 (Treatment Progress Report
of Ms Emma Selby dated 30 September 2025). See also
ts 181 (6 November
Exhibit 2, book of materials vol 2, page 451 (Psychiatric Report of
Dr Edward Petch dated 30 September 2025). The passage has here
reproduced is in the form corrected by Dr Petch in the course of his
evidence, see ts 186 - 187 (6 November
Exhibit 2, book of materials vol 2, page 359 (Treatment Progress Report of Ms
Emma Selby dated 30 September
Exhibit 2, book of materials vol 2, page 360 (Treatment Progress Report of Ms
Emma Selby dated 30 September
ts 182 (6 November
Order 2 of the orders made on 23 June 2025 by Forrester
Which earlier report was reproduced at exhibit 1, book of materials vol 1, pages
192 - 266 (Psychiatric Report of Dr Edward Petch
dated 17 September
2024); ts 177 (6 November
Exhibit 2, book of materials vol 2, page 377 (Psychiatric Report of
Dr Edward Petch dated
30 September 2025).
ts 177 - 178, 181 (6 November
Exhibit 2, book of materials vol 2, pages 373 - 375 (Psychiatric Report of
Dr Edward Petch dated
30 September 2025).
Exhibit 2, book of materials vol 2, page 377 (Psychiatric Report of
Dr Edward Petch dated
30 September 2025).
Exhibit 2, book of materials vol 2, page 379 (Psychiatric Report of
Dr Edward Petch dated
30 September 2025).
Exhibit 2, book of materials vol 2, pages 378 - 379 (Psychiatric Report of
Dr Edward Petch dated
30 September 2025).
Exhibit 2, book of materials vol 2, page 378 (Psychiatric Report of
Dr Edward Petch dated 30 September 2025). See also ts 181
Exhibit 2, book of materials vol 2, page 379 (Psychiatric Report of
Dr Edward Petch dated
30 September 2025).
Exhibit 2, book of materials vol 2, pages 378 - 379 (Psychiatric Report of
Dr Edward Petch dated 30 September
Exhibit 2, book of materials vol 2, page 402 (Psychiatric Report of
Dr Edward Petch dated 30 September 2025); exhibit 1, book of
materials vol 1, pages 182 - 185 (Individual Management Plan dated 29 May
Exhibit 2, book of materials vol 2, page 381 (Psychiatric Report of
Dr Edward Petch dated 30 September 2025); ts 178 (6 November
ts 211 (6 November
Exhibit 1, book of materials vol 1, pages 202 - 220 (Psychiatric Report of
Dr Edward Petch dated 17 September 2024); exhibit 2, book
materials vol 2, pages 382 - 400 (Psychiatric Report of Dr Edward Petch
30 September 2025).
Exhibit 2, book of materials vol 2, pages 449 - 450 (Psychiatric Report of
Dr Edward Petch dated
30 September 2025).
Exhibit 2, book of materials volume 2, page 401 (Psychiatric Report of
Dr Edward Petch dated 30 September 2025); page 464 (Community
Supervision Assessment Report of Mr Paul Mackie dated 17 October
Exhibit 2, book of materials vol 2, pages 431 - 435 (Psychiatric Report of
Dr Edward Petch dated 30 September
Exhibit 2, book of materials vol 2, page 433 (Psychiatric Report of
Dr Edward Petch dated
30 September 2025).
Exhibit 2, book of materials vol 2, page 435 (Psychiatric Report of
Dr Edward Petch dated 30 September 2025).
Exhibit 2, book of materials vol 2, page 435 (Psychiatric Report of
Dr Edward Petch dated
30 September 2025).
Exhibit 2, book of materials vol 2, page 436 (Psychiatric Report of
Dr Edward Petch dated
30 September 2025).
Exhibit 2, book of materials vol 2, page 437 (Psychiatric Report of
Dr Edward Petch dated
30 September 2025).
ts 185 (6 November
Exhibit 2, book of materials vol 2, page 440 (Psychiatric Report of
Dr Edward Petch dated
30 September 2025).
ts 194 - 195 (6 November
Exhibit 2, book of materials vol 2, page 440 (Psychiatric Report of
Dr Edward Petch dated
30 September 2025).
Exhibit 2, book of materials vol 2, page 440 (Psychiatric Report of
Dr Edward Petch dated
30 September 2025).
Exhibit 2, book of materials vol 2, page 441 (Psychiatric Report of
Dr Edward Petch dated
30 September 2025).
Exhibit 2, book of materials vol 2, page 441 (Psychiatric Report of
Dr Edward Petch dated 30 September
Exhibit 2, book of materials vol 2, pages 442 - 443 (Psychiatric Report of
Dr Edward Petch dated 30 September
Exhibit 2, book of materials vol 2, page 444 (Psychiatric Report of
Dr Edward Petch dated 30 September
Exhibit 2, book of materials vol 2, pages 442 - 446
(Psychiatric Report of Dr Edward Petch dated 30 September
Exhibit 2, book of materials vol 2, page 446 (Psychiatric Report of
Dr Edward Petch dated
30 September 2025).
Exhibit 2, book of materials vol 2, pages 447 - 448 (Psychiatric Report of
Dr Edward Petch dated 30 September
Exhibit 2, book of materials vol 2, page 448 (Psychiatric Report of
Dr Edward Petch dated
30 September 2025).
Exhibit 2, book of materials vol 2, page 450 (Psychiatric Report of
Dr Edward Petch dated
30 September 2025).
Exhibit 2, book of materials vol 2, page 451 (Psychiatric Report of
Dr Edward Petch dated
30 September 2025).
Exhibit 2, book of materials vol 2, page 451 (Psychiatric Report of
Dr Edward Petch dated 30 September 2025). See also ts 181
Exhibit 2, book of materials vol 2, page 451 (Psychiatric Report of
Dr Edward Petch dated
30 September 2025).
Exhibit 2, book of materials vol 2, page 451 (Psychiatric Report of
Dr Edward Petch dated
30 September 2025).
Exhibit 2, book of materials vol 2, pages 452 - 453 (Psychiatric Report of
Dr Edward Petch dated 30 September 2025); ts 184 (6 November
Exhibit 2, book of materials vol 2, page 454 (Psychiatric Report of
Dr Edward Petch dated
30 September 2025).
Exhibit 2, book of materials vol 2, page 454 (Psychiatric Report of
Dr Edward Petch dated
30 September 2025).
Exhibit 2, book of materials vol 2, page 454 (Psychiatric Report of
Dr Edward Petch dated
30 September 2025).
ts 178 (6 November
ts 187 (6 November
Exhibit 2, book of materials vol 2, page 454 (Psychiatric Report of
Dr Edward Petch dated 30 September 2025; ts 188 (6 November
Exhibit 2, book of materials vol 2, page 454 (Psychiatric Report of
Dr Edward Petch dated 30 September 2025); ts 198 (6 November
Exhibit 2, book of materials vol 2, page 455 (Psychiatric Report of
Dr Edward Petch dated
30 September 2025).
Exhibit 2, book of materials vol 2, pages 459 - 461 (Psychiatric Report of
Dr Edward Petch dated 30 September
Exhibit 2, book of materials vol 2, page 458 (Psychiatric Report of
Dr Edward Petch dated
30 September 2025).
Exhibit 2, book of materials vol 2, page 459 (Psychiatric Report of
Dr Edward Petch dated
30 September 2025).
ts 183 (6 November
ts 179 - 180 (6 November
ts 191 (6 November
Exhibit 2, book of materials vol 2, pages 356 - 357 (Treatment Progress Report
of Ms Emma Selby dated 30 September
Exhibit 2, book of materials vol 2, page 359 (Treatment Progress Report of Ms
Emma Selby dated 30 September
Exhibit 2, book of materials vol 2, page 360 (Treatment Progress Report of Ms
Emma Selby dated 30 September
Exhibit 2, book of materials vol 2, page 361 (Treatment Progress Report of Ms
Emma Selby dated 30 September
Exhibit 2, book of materials vol 2, page 361 (Treatment Progress Report of Ms
Emma Selby dated 30 September
Exhibit 2, book of materials vol 2, page 361 (Treatment Progress Report of Ms
Emma Selby dated 30 September
Exhibit 2, book of materials vol 2, page 361 (Treatment Progress Report of Ms
Emma Selby dated 30 September
Exhibit 2, book of materials vol 2, page 362 (Treatment Progress Report of Ms
Emma Selby dated 30 September
Exhibit 2, book of materials vol 2, page 362 (Treatment Progress Report of Ms
Emma Selby dated 30 September
Exhibit 2, book of materials vol 2, page 362 (Treatment Progress Report of Ms
Emma Selby dated 30 September
Exhibit 2, book of materials vol 2, page 363 (Treatment Progress Report of Ms
Emma Selby dated 30 September
Exhibit 2, book of materials vol 2, page 363 (Treatment Progress Report of Ms
Emma Selby dated 30 September
Exhibit 2, book of materials vol 2, page 364 (Treatment Progress Report of Ms
Emma Selby dated 30 September
Exhibit 2, book of materials vol 2, page 364 (Treatment Progress Report of Ms
Emma Selby dated 30 September
Exhibit 2, book of materials vol 2, page 462 (Community Supervision Assessment
Report of Mr Paul Mackie dated 17 October
Exhibit 2, book of materials vol 2, page 465 (Community Supervision Assessment
Report of Mr Paul Mackie dated 17 October
Exhibit 2, book of materials vol 2, page 465 (Community Supervision Assessment
Report of Mr Paul Mackie dated 17 October
Exhibit 2, book of materials vol 2, page 465 (Community Supervision Assessment
Report of Mr Paul Mackie dated 17 October
Exhibit 2, book of materials vol 2, page 465 (Community Supervision Assessment
Report of Mr Paul Mackie dated 17 October
Mackie report page
Exhibit 2, book of materials vol 2, page 466 (Community Supervision Assessment
Report of Mr Paul Mackie dated 17 October
Exhibit 2, book of materials vol 2, page 466 (Community Supervision Assessment
Report of Mr Paul Mackie dated 17 October
Exhibit 2, book of materials vol 2, page 466 (Community Supervision Assessment
Report of Mr Paul Mackie dated 17 October
Exhibit 2, book of materials vol 2, page 466 (Community Supervision Assessment
Report of Mr Paul Mackie dated 17 October
Exhibit 2, book of materials vol 2, page 466 (Community Supervision Assessment
Report of Mr Paul Mackie dated 17 October
Exhibit 2, book of materials vol 2, page 467 (Community Supervision Assessment
Report of Mr Paul Mackie dated 17 October
Exhibit 2, book of materials vol 2, pages 469 - 475 (Community Supervision
Assessment Report of Mr Paul Mackie dated 17 October
Exhibit 2, book of materials vol 2, page 469 (Community Supervision Assessment
Report of Mr Paul Mackie dated 17 October
Exhibit 2, book of materials vol 2, page 469 (Community Supervision Assessment
Report of Mr Paul Mackie dated 17 October
Garlett v The State of
Western Australia
[227] (Edelman J), citing
Vella v Commissioner of
Police (NSW)
(2019) 269 CLR 219 [88],
Director of Public
Prosecutions (WA) v Williams
[2007] WASCA 206
(2007) 35 WAR 297
[63] - [65] and
Italiano v The State of
Western Australia
[2009] WASCA 116
Exhibit 2, book of materials vol 2, page 458 (Psychiatric Report of
Dr Edward Petch dated 30 September
Director of Public
Prosecutions (WA) v GTR
Exhibit 2, book of materials vol 2, page 454 (Psychiatric Report of
Dr Edward Petch dated 30 September
The State of Western
Australia v Garlett
[2021] WASC 387
[139], cited with approval in
The State of Western
Australia v D'Rozario [No 3]
[2021] WASC 412
[22]. See also
Condon v Pompano Pty
[2013] HCA 7
(2013) 252 CLR 38
[23], cited in
The State of Western
Australia v Garlett
Exhibit 2, book of materials vol 2, page 464 (Community Supervision Assessment
Report of Mr Paul Mackie dated 17 October 2025); ts
The State of Western
Australia v Garlett
[136(d)], as noted by Quinlan CJ in
The State of Western
Australia v D'Rozario [No 3]
High Risk Serious Offenders Act
Garlett v The State of
Western Australia
High Risk Serious Offenders Act
Director of Public
Prosecutions for Western Australia v Hart
[2019] WASC 4
The State of Western
Australia v West [No 6]
[2019] WASC 427
The State of Western
Australia v
[2020] WASC 330
[56] ‑ [58];
The State of Western
Australia v Patrick [No 4]
[2020] WASC 48
[109] ‑ [111];
The State of Western
Australia v MAM
[2022] WASC 100
High Risk Serious Offenders Act
High Risk Serious Offenders Act
Exhibit 2, book of materials vol 2, page 458 (Psychiatric Report of
Dr Edward Petch dated 30 September
Exhibit 2, book of materials vol 2, page 363 (Treatment Progress Report of Ms
Emma Selby dated 30 September
Exhibit 2, book of materials vol 2, page 444 (Psychiatric Report of
Dr Edward Petch dated 30 September
Exhibit 2, book of materials vol 2, page 452 (Psychiatric Report of
Dr Edward Petch dated 30 September
Exhibit 2, book of materials vol 2, page 466 (Community Supervision Assessment
Report of Mr Paul Mackie dated 17 October 2025); ts
201 (6 November
ts 216 (6 November
Exhibit 2, book of materials vol 2, page 457 (Psychiatric Report of
Dr Edward Petch dated 30 September
Exhibit 2, book of materials vol 2, page 457 (Psychiatric Report of
Dr Edward Petch dated 30 September
ts 176 - 177 (6 November 2025).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (963 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter