URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WATPAT/2004/219.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:10:25
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Busen Pty Ltd v City of Subiaco [2004] WATPAT 219 (10 December 2004)
IN THE TOWN PLANNING
APPEAL TRIBUNAL OF
WESTERN AUSTRALIA
Appeal No. 193 of 2004
[2004] WATPAT 219
Heard: 15, 16 and 17 November 2004
Decision: 10 December 2004
B E T W E E N:
BUSEN PTY LTD
CITY OF SUBIACO
Mr P McGowan
(President)
Change of use – Tavern – Undue aggregation – Amenity
– Car parking – Cash in lieu – Discretion
– Development
Cases referred to
Napoli v City of Stirling
[2004] WATPAT 81
Appearances
Mr J Skinner (instructed by McLeods) appeared for the Appellant
Mr CB Edmonds SC and Mr J Woodhouse (instructed by Watts Woodhouse)
appeared for the Respondent
The Tribunal:
This appeal is concerned with
Lots 1, 30, 31, 32 and 33 at the corner of Rokeby Road and Hay Street in Subiaco
the subject property
”). In relation to the subject property
the present tenancies and uses are as
(a) 67 – 69 Rokeby Road: Chutney Mary’s Restaurant (a licensed
restaurant);
(b) 71 Rokeby Road: Jewellery shop with a current planning approval for use as a
restaurant;
(c) 73 Rokeby Road: Operated as a
café/restaurant
2. The Appellant is presently the operator of Chutney Mary’s Restaurants
and has a series of conditional commercial arrangements
with the owners of the
other properties to provide the basis upon which it proposed to effect a change
of use to the whole of the
Appellant’s proposal was
“(a) Amalgamate each of the premises on the development land;
(b) Surrender the current restaurant license on the granting of a category A
liquor license under the provision of the
(c) Proposed business name as Chutney Mary’s Wine and Coffee House;
(d) Provide for the reasonable requirements of people who live, work or visit
4. As part of that, that would involve in effect the conversion of the three
tenancies to a tavern but on the basis that the premises
would operate as a
coffee shop from 8:00am – 12:00 noon with liquor not being served until
after 12:00 noon. That would require
some internal alterations to facilitate the
physical amalgamation of the tenancies but would involve the potential existing
with appropriate sound attenuation treatments to existing
July 2004 the Council of the Respondent resolved to refuse the application. It
provided the following
“(a) The proposal is considered contrary to clause 7 of Town Planning
Scheme No. 4 as it would give rise to an unacceptable
concentration of premises,
licence to serve alcohol that is considered contrary to the enhancement of the
health, safety and general
welfare of the community and social and cultural
environment;
(b) The proposal is considered to be contrary to clause 53(b) of Town Planning
Scheme No. 4 as it would give rise to an unacceptable
concentration of premises,
licensed to serve alcohol near the intersection of Rokeby Road and Hay Street
thereby reducing land use
diversity within immediate proximity of the subject
(c) The proposal is considered to be contrary to clause 53(e) of Town Planning
Scheme No. 4 in that the applicant has not adequately
demonstrated that the
proposal would not negatively impact upon the amenity of the area including
nearby residential development.
(d) In the long term the resulting concentration of premises licensed to serve
alcohol is considered contrary to the principles of
orderly and proper planning;
(e) Contrary to clause 70 of Town Planning Scheme No. 4 in that adequate car
parking has been
present appeal is brought from that
The subject property is zoned Town
Centre under the Respondent’s Town Planning Scheme No. 4 (“
Under TPS 4
“Tavern” is an AA use. This, under TPS 4, means permissible at the
discretion of the Respondent.
More detailed
description of the proposal
Evidence was given by Mr
Murray Kimber. Mr Kimber is a Director of the Appellant. He is a person who has
experience in relation to
licensed premises in various capacities going back to
the late 1970s. In more recent times he has established Nine Mary’s
and Bar located at 16 Milligan Street, Perth. He gave evidence that
the operation there undertaken is very similar to that which
is proposed for
Chutney Mary’s Wine and Coffee
At present, 67 – 69 Rokeby
Road is where Chutney Mary’s operates. This is an Indian Restaurant
specialising in providing
authentic Indian cuisine. Its current trading hours
are Monday to Friday 12:00 – 2:30pm and 5:30pm – 11:00pm then on
Saturday and Sunday 5:30pm – 11:00pm. There is no entertainment provided
and low-level background dining music is played through
a small sound
As Mr Kimber points out, the
principal change involved to Chutney Mary’s Wine and Coffee House
“will be the ability to
consume liquor without also having to consume a
substantial meal”. As he points out this is one of the fundamental
distinctions
between a restaurant licence and a tavern licence under the
Liquor Licensing Act 1988
indicates that approximately 50% of the total public area of the proposal can be
individually separated or closed off if required
from the remainder of the
public area:
“A dining only experience or
private function can therefore easily be enjoyed in entirely different separate
ambience to the
remainder of the premises.”
The bar area will be
approximately 19m
in area compared to the existing area in Chutney
Mary’s Restaurant of approximately 16m
. The kitchen will be in
the same location and will be the same sized kitchen for Chutney Mary’s
Restaurant.
The total public floor area of
the proposed premises is
Thus for example he
compared such a size with other premises in the area
“(a) Subiaco Hotel – approximately 600m
(b) Llama Bar – approximately 250m
(c) Clancy’s Fish Pub – approximately 280m
(d) Paddy Maguires Irish Pub – approximately 250m
(e) The Vic Hotel – approximately 500m
proposed trading hours for Chutney Mary’s Wine and Coffee House are as
follows: Monday to Wednesday 8:00am – 12:00
midnight, Thursday to Saturday
8:00am – 1:00am, Sunday 10:00am –
As he indicates, on Thursday to
Saturday there is an intention to apply for an extended trading permit to enable
trading to operate
between 12:00 midnight and
It is intended that breakfast will
be served from 8:00am – 12:00 midday on Monday to Saturday and from
10:00am on Sunday. No
liquor will be sold or applied during the breakfast
service. There will then be lunch from 12:00 – 2:30pm and dinner from 5:30
– 11:00pm seven days a week.
will also be after 11:00pm a special menu for drinks, cocktails, functions which
provides for substantial food to be consumed
during that period. This, as Mr
Kimber indicates, is a service that is currently lacking in Subiaco and not
promoted or encouraged
by other hotel or tavern
There will be no live music or
bands either amplified or acoustic. There will be pre-recorded music solely for
the specific purpose
of background dining music and / or background bar
Accoustic consultants have been
engaged who have undertaken a noise assessment. In that regard Mr Kimber relies
upon the report of
Mr Terry George of Lloyd Accoustics. There are then further
issues addressed by Mr Kimber to which I will return in relation to management,
security and other matters.
In any event a
more detailed list of trading conditions incorporating a management plan forms
part of the evidence provided by Mr
The intersection of Hay Street and
Rokeby Road, Subiaco is one of Perth’s most well-known areas. Ms Denise
Morgan (a consultant
planner retained by the Respondent) describes the area
“the node centred around the intersection
of Rokeby Road and Hay Street has a greater concentration of
“entertainment”
activities, such as restaurants, cinemas, the Regal
Theatre and Subiaco Hotel ...”.
Relevant Scheme Provisions
It is accepted that the
nature of that which is proposed and the change of use contemplated is
specifically addressed by clause 22(2)
In considering the matter given that it
involves a liquor licence, clause 27A speaks expressly to the position. In
other words
addition to those provisions which are applicable to development
applications generally (clause 27) these are additional matters,
which, if there
is a liquor licence involved must also be addressed in considering the
application. Of particular significance is
(b) the effect of aggregating development characterised by after-hours
operation and relatively low levels of activity during normal
Then in relation to the Town
Centre zone (of which the subject property forms part) the following aims and
objectives appear:
“53 AIMS AND OBJECTIVES
In considering an application for development approval in the Town Centre Zone
the Council, shall have regard to the following
objectives:
(a) to encourage the
development of high quality buildings of special character commensurate with
their location within the Town Centre
of Subiaco;
(b) to encourage vibrant and diverse uses, including residential, which
promote the area as the Town Centre of Subiaco;
(c) to foster greater pedestrian, cycle and public transport accessibility
through appropriate design measures which promote greater
pedestrian use and
linkages between uses and modes of transport;
(d) to encourage retention of the heritage character by reinforcing original
development patterns and by the recycling of original
building stock, and in
addition, ensuring new development is appropriately designed and has due regard
of the unique character of
(e) the protection of the amenity of areas adjacent to the Town Centre
(f) to ensure the development of continuous ‘shop-front’
development along street frontages in accordance with Main Street
principles, and avoid disruption caused by blank or uninteresting buildings;
(g) to discourage the undue aggregation of entertainment facilities
characterised by after-hours operation and by low levels of activity
normal shopping hours.”
Incidentally, objective
53(g) was gazetted to take effect as part of the omnibus amendments which were
gazetted on 22 October 2004.
nevertheless satisfied based upon the evidence given by Ms Morgan that they were
matters which were to be categorised as seriously
entertained proposals at the
time at which the Respondent came to consider the
application.
In any event, the matter was
addressed as part of this appeal on the basis that the amendments have been
gazetted and therefore have
legal effect. As such therefore, I am bound to have
regard to those provisions now forming part of TPS
Ms Morgan also relies upon the Town
Centre Precinct Policy which includes the following planning
“1. To encourage vibrant and diverse mixed use areas including residential
uses rather than solely retail or commercial
development”.
present of course there is no residential development in the immediate vicinity
of the subject property, it being entirely surrounded
by retail or commercial
development, mainly, as Ms Morgan points out, of an entertainment
In TPS 4 “amenity” is
defined to mean “all those factors, which combine to form the character of
an area and include
the present and likely future amenity.” It is
interesting to observe that such a defined expression requires different
considerations
than may have been the case in relation to the consideration of
amenity as understood by a resident in relation to a development
impact upon residential amenity.
no residential aspect to the area immediately adjacent to the subject property
and it cannot be contended in those circumstances
that ordinarily one would
understand that there is amenity of a business or of a commercial operation
capable of expression in relation
to resisting a development application. In
this matter the definition of amenity requires consideration by reason of that
definition.
The thrust of Ms
Morgan’s evidence appears to be largely driven by work that she has done
in relation to the development of
the Northbridge Policy. It would appear from
the evidence given that the development of that policy and the effective
identification
of a precinct in Northbridge primarily given over to late night
entertainment uses has meant that it has become a less diverse environment
“has a distinct lack of general retail activities and other services that
would generate activity during the
She then offers what could only
be described as a broad generalisation:
“Subiaco still has that diversity, but if it
continues to convert shops and lunch bars to entertainment-type uses that have
mainly evening and night-time focus, then it will lose its diversity, and along
with that, its vibrancy. The City of Subiaco is
very consciously trying to
maintain diversity by the implementation of TPS 4 and its policies.”
The first observation is
that there is no factual foundation demonstrated for the generalised assertion.
The second, given that it
is a generalisation, is that it does not address with
any specificity either the precise location of the subject property or to some
extent historic development, if not encouragement, in accordance with the
provisions of TPS 4.
Ms Morgan offers the
observation that:
“I don’t consider the
proposed use to be in any way comparable to the existing uses
38. That is neither, as a statement, completely correct, nor of particular
relevance. The description provided above by Mr Kimber
represents a significant
replication of the activities currently undertaken by Chutney Mary’s
Restaurant. Rather, what is occurring
is the enlargement of the premises and a
change of use but still maintaining the primary operation of Chutney
is no planning basis upon which the approval of the present application could
depend upon comparing present uses and proposed
uses. Rather, it is by reference
to relevant planning considerations including TPS 4 that the determination is
undertaken.
Of particular concern is the
conclusion expressed by Ms Morgan:
of the proposed tavern will add to the concentration of late night or
“after-hours” venues around the
intersection of Rokeby Road and Hay
Street contrary to the City’s objectives for the Town Centre
41. That to me is not the objective as articulated in the Scheme. The relevant
objective is 53(g):
“To discourage the undue aggregation of
entertainment facilities characterised by after-hours operation and by low
activity during normal shopping hours.”
It seems to me that there a
number of sequential steps to be addressed before one could invite the
conclusion that the present proposal
does not meet this particular
After all there are on the
subject property already a restaurant operating as licensed premises and there
is already an existing approval
in relation to part of the
As Mr Kimber observes, the scale
of the operation given the way in which Chutney Mary’s has operated to
date would not, in my
view, lead it being characterised as an after-hours
operation. Rather, it intends to extend its operation to provide for use from
8:00am onwards. The provision of breakfast is not a matter hitherto provided and
does provide the basis for activity during normal
Secondly the scale of the operation
as described by Mr Kimber significantly sets it apart from other late night
operations which may
well represent that with which this objective is
Finally I am not satisfied in
any event that that which is proposed particularly where it is located, could
lead to the result that
it represents “undue aggregation”. It is not
without significance that the Respondent’s planning officers recommended
to Council in both March 2004 and July 2004 that approval be granted subject to
conditions.
In any event, as Mr Rowe, an
experienced planner and architect observes, the management plan and the trading
conditions proposed meet
the objectives of TPS
Evidence to a somewhat contrary effect
to that given by Ms Morgan was given by Mr Malcolm Mackay. Mr Mackay is an
architect and
designer. He refers to the cluttering of licenced premises
which he says offers the following
“8.10.1 Locating licensed premises close to other synergistic uses (that
is, uses which have a clear patronage relationship
to licensed premises) such as
the Regal Theatre, the cinemas, surrounding offices, restaurants and the
8.10.2 Reducing the pressure to locate licensed premises further afield where
they may have a greater influence on residential areas,
and where they may
encourage car use to cover the greater distance between them and the land uses
that generate the patronage demand
for the licensed premises.
8.10.3 Reducing the pressure of a growing population on a limited number of
premises and, thus, reduce the requirement for entry
queuing at peak periods and
the associated patron frustrations.
8.10.4 Encouraging the licensed premises to compete to provide a more desirable
level of service.
8.10.5 Allowing a greater proportion of licensed premises to locate within easy
walking distance of public transport to minimise
the prospect of patrons
drinking and driving.
8.10.6 Locating licensed premises in a highly visible location to help mitigate
any temptation offered by less visible areas to engage
in antisocial
behaviour.”
is from a design stand point. From a different stand point is the evidence given
by Ms Tanya Chickritzhs. Ms Chickritzhs is a
researcher who has carried out some
research in relation to alcohol primarily as an epidemiologist. In particular
for example she
observes in relation to what is described as the bunching of
licensed premises quotes:
cross-sectional studies suggest that alcohol related problems are more likely to
occur where licensed premises are
located in close proximity to one another.
According to Liquor Licences and Department for Licensing, Gaming and Liquor
of Western Australia there are currently 57 licensed
premises operating in the
Subiaco area. Amongst these 3 taverns, 24 restaurants, 2 night clubs, 1 liquor
store, 5 wholesalers and
4 special facility licenses (including the Llama Bar)
are located on either Hay Street or Rokeby Road – totalling to 39 licensed
premises. This is indicative of bunching.”
50. Further evidence was also given by Senior Sergeant Sutton. He is a Sergeant
of Police and is the officer in charge of the Subiaco
Police Station. He has
occupied this position since December 2003 but in fact commenced at Subiaco on
28 January 2004. He observes
that Subiaco Police Station is responsible for
licensed premises in what is described as the Subiaco police district (this
Subiaco, Nedlands, Daglish, Karrakatta, Shenton Park and Crawley). He
makes the following observation in relation to the intersection
of Hay Street
and Rokeby Road:
“The pedestrian traffic at this
intersection, especially around the closing time of licensed premises is
51. He was at pains, however, to emphasise that he has implemented a number of
initiatives in relation to dealing with antisocial
behaviour in the area. Of
particular interest was the fact that he has ensured that he and his fellow
officers are made aware of
the conditions which attach to licensed premises.
52. There is the licensed premises working group which meets regularly for the
purpose of dealing with such issues as crowd management,
waste management,
loitering and anti-social behaviour. He was also at pains to point out that he
has instigated action being taken
Liquor Licensing Act 1998
failure to observe the terms of the conditions under which licensed premises are
currently operating. This includes charges for
over-crowding and lack of
security. Of particular interest was the observation made by Senior Sergeant
Sutton in relation to the
kebab shop. This will cease as part of the proposal
the subject of the present application. He saw the fact that this was to be
was a positive element. This was seen as a place where people
congregate. Finally it should be observed that no objection has been
the police to the present
application.
Ultimately,
I am satisfied in the circumstances that the amenity (as that term is defined in
TPS4) of the area will not be affected
by allowing the present proposal to
Car parking
Car parking requirements for
the subject land are dealt with in clause 70 of TPS4. Clause 70 reads as
“70 CAR PARKING
(1) Car parking shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of:
(a) the Residential Planning Codes for residential development; and
(b) Table 2: Carparking Requirements.
(2) If the Scheme does not specify the number of spaces required in respect
of any particular use, then the number of parking spaces
to be provided shall be
determined by the Council having regard to other relevant or similar uses, if
(3) Where a building is used for multiple purposes, the number of carparking
spaces to be provided in accordance with Table 2 or as
determined by the Council
shall be calculated separately for each part of the building used for a
different purpose.
(4) When the use of any land or building is:
(a) changed to another use; or
(b) involves an intensification of a use,
additional parking spaces shall, unless otherwise approved by Council, be
provided to meet the requirements of the Scheme.
(5) When a development of any land is enlarged or partly or wholly
redeveloped, parking spaces to meet the requirements of the Scheme
provided in respect of the new development.
(6) Clause 28 shall apply to the requirement to provide carparking spaces
under this Part subject to the following:
(a) notwithstanding clause 28 the Council cannot grant development approval
in respect of a development where a concession is sought
as to the number of
carparking spaces to be provided which exceeds 25% of the number required under
Clause 28 deals with the Council’s decision to grant
development approval to a non-complying application.”
The car parking requirements
set out in Table 2 of TPS4 indicate the number of bays required is 45. The
parties are agreed as to this
being the required
What the Appellant proposes is to
provide 18 car parking bays on-site, 15 bays off-site at the Ace Cinema
Complex and the remainder
(25%) are to be the subject of a concession under
clause 70(6) and clause 28 of TPS4.
extent to which there is any shortfall the Appellant further proposes that that
be addressed by way of a cash-in-lieu payment
in accordance with the provisions
of clause 75 of TPS4.
Against the
background of this issue of car parking an initial issue arises as to whether
what is involved is a change of use or
development.
The Appellant’s primary
contention is that in essence what is involved is a change of use and that
therefore the matter is entirely
governed by clause 70(4). That is, that
there is a further discretion specifically embedded in relation to this clause
that what is involved is a change of
The counter-view advanced by the
Respondent is that what is involved is necessarily development because although
there may not be
significant changes to the internal structure of the premises
on the subject property, nevertheless there will be changes and as
constitutes development. In that regard clause 70(5) contains no additional
discretion.
To that must be added
“(1) Except for development in respect of which the Residential Planning
Codes apply, if a development is the subject of an
application for planning
approval and does not comply with a standard or requirement prescribed under the
Scheme, the Council may,
despite the non-compliance, approve the application
unconditionally or subject to such conditions as the Council thinks
62. However, I am not at all satisfied that the matter is necessarily to be
approached in such a disjunctive way.
63. It seems to me upon any reasonable analysis that what is involved in the
present application is a change of use but it also involves
development. I do
not believe the provisions are exclusive of each other so as to limit the
circumstances in which the specific discretion,
contained in clause 70(4)
would be applicable.
64. I am satisfied in the present circumstances that the discretion generally
available under clause 28 and the discretion in
clause 70(4) is available in the consideration of the present
application.
65. That then takes me to consideration of clause 70(6). The
Respondent’s contention is that the proper construction
clause 70, and clause 70(6) in particular when read with clause 28,
means that in no circumstances is it
possible to grant
a concession greater than
25% of the 45 bays that are required by reason of Table 2 of TPS4.
66. This provision is akin to the matters which were addressed by the Tribunal
Napoli v City of Stirling
[2004] WATPAT 81.
This provision is to be
approached on the basis that it is itself a standard or requirement and does not
curtail or otherwise
limit the discretion generally provided by
67. That is not to say that due regard will not be given to the expression
contained within clause 70(6) but to recognise and
that the general
discretion reserved by the Respondent in clause 28 is there to be addressed
against considerations which
would apply
where it appears justified or
appropriate that a greater concession should be
On-site bays
68. Set out below is what is described as a schedule of approvals for the
subject property. This was produced from the Respondent’s
records. It
identifies, over a long period of time, approvals which have been granted and in
particular the way in which the question
of parking has been addressed by the
Respondent. In addition it should be seen that on at least three occasions the
Respondent has
addressed the question of parking shortfall on a cash-in-lieu
“SCHEDULE OF APPROVALS FOR
Shop No (on 1979 plan)
Nature of tenancy (existing)
Date of approval
Restaurant Orig Pizza Now CM
29 March 1996
$35250 CIL for 3 bays
(6 required) for Carnegie Restaurant. It
comprising the 2 former shops
Restaurant Orig Fish Now CM
3 February 1998
Renewal of 29 March 96 approval
Orig S’wich Now Glittaz
5 March 2003
Busen application. Legal
agreement on parking
required – must
demonstrate 4 dedicated
Restaurant Orig show Now Altos
13 April 1983
Additional seating – no
additional parking
26 November 1987
$24,000 CIL Additional
seating – for 4 bays. Not
proceed. But
reconsidered – 2 bays CIL
28 May 1998
Additional seating – approved but ---$34,600 CIL for 2 bays at
$17,300 each
69. The 18 bays are arrived at by the following
(a) there are 8 parking bays which are the subject of existing leases of 67 and
71 Rokeby Road;
(b) there are 3 parking bays under a conditional agreement undertaken on
assignment of the lease by the Appellant for 73 Rokeby Road;
(c) there is an agreement with Mr Chan on behalf of his two sons who are the
owners of the subject property for an additional 7 parking
70. In addition Mr Chan Snr produced a drawing which indicated that there could
be 19 parking bays on the basis that the additional
1 was one reserved for him,
given that he occupies an office within the subject property.
71. The point advanced by the Respondent is that whilst that may be so (and to
the extent that there is any contest I determine that
that is the fact) the
result would be that the notional attribution of 18 bays to the Appellant would
mean that the other tenancies
in the subject property would be in breach of
their respective planning approvals obtained from 1979 and continuing.
72. The argument advanced by the Respondent was that in the circumstance it
would therefore be contrary to the public interest and
to orderly and proper
planning to permit the 18 bays to be treated as available for the proposed
73. Primarily this seems to me to be an issue between the owners of the
properties and the respective tenants.
74. I do not for the moment accept that given the arrangements referred to above
that it is not open to the Appellant to contend,
and in light of the evidence
advanced before me, that there are 18 on-site bays available in order to meet
that aspect of TPS4 with
which the question of car parking is concerned.
75. It should also be added that there is no difficulty in relation to the
on-site parking bays or their operation in terms of traffic
management and
safety. This much was accepted by a traffic engineer, Ms Pickford, called
on behalf of the Respondent.
15 Car Bays at the Ace Cinema
76. It should be identified at the outset that the Appellant contends this is
not a case of joint use of parking. That is a matter
addressed by
clause 71(1) of TPS4:
“(1) Parking spaces may be provided jointly by two or more owners or users
of land or by one owner or user in respect of separate
buildings or uses,
subject to and in accordance with the requirements of this
77. The Respondent’s contention was that as a result of arrangements
proposed to be entered into with Secure Parking (WA) Pty
Ltd at the facility on
the adjacent Ace Cinema site, those parking bays are therefore provided within
clause 70. No reliance is therefore
placed upon clause 71.
78. It does seem to me that there is strength in this aspect of the
Appellant’s argument. It is true that where the expression
parking shall be provided” appears in clause 70 there is no requirement
that the parking be provided on the subject
79. Such an interpretation is by no means inconsistent with the nature of the
present application, its location generally and its
specific location within the
Town Centre precinct of the City of Subiaco.
80. This should also be understood against the background of the evidence of
Ms Pickford, who agreed that there was no shortage
parking within the
general Town Centre area for patrons wishing to use the premises on the subject
81. I am therefore satisfied that what the Appellant proposes is open to it
within the provisions of TPS4 and represents a matter
to be addressed in terms
of any conditions to attach to the approval to be
Cash-in-lieu
82. The Respondent contends that this is not a matter which can be imposed upon
the Respondent if otherwise the Tribunal was disposed
“75 CASH IN LIEU OF CAR PARKING
(1) An applicant for development approval may, if the Council so agrees, make
a shortfall cash payment to the City in lieu of the
provision of all or any of
the number of carparking spaces required by the Scheme.”
83. It is the Respondent’s contention that no matter what the Tribunal may
determine it cannot impose such a matter upon the
Council and thereby require it
to both receive moneys and to invest them pursuant to an arrangement it is not
willing to enter into,
nor for which it has any provision.
84. The answer to such a proposition is that if there was otherwise a shortfall
then the matter either could be addressed by reference
to the general discretion
under clause 28, or the discretion contained in clause 70(4) when read with
clause 70(6).
85. In general terms there is some force in what the Respondent contends. The
result must be, if that were the case, that such a
matter could not be forced
upon the Respondent.
86. I am satisfied in the circumstances however that the discretion exists in
the way that I have addressed the matter and that as
a result in relation to the
question of car parking I am satisfied that the proposal advanced by the
Appellant meets the requirements
of TPS4 when discretion is exercised in
accordance with the provisions to which I have referred.
87. I am satisfied in the circumstances that it is appropriate to grant that
discretion and so permit the present application to
88. In the circumstances I am satisfied that the Appellant has made out its
case. I am therefore prepared to make
(a) The appeal be allowed.
(b) Development approval granted.
(c) The parties have 14 days within which to liaise as to the full suite of
conditions to attach to the approval now to be granted,
provided that such
conditions are to include the trading conditions and management plan referred to
at paragraphs 68 to 73 of Mr
witness statement and annexures
10 and 11 to that statement.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (115 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter