URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WABDT/2011/69.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:56:16
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
RG & PH PRIDDLE and IP ELSON (Decision O.19482) [2011] WABDT 69 (30 August 2011)
DISPUTES TRIBUNAL
MR D FORRESTER Deputy Chairperson MR P MITTONETTE Member
MS G KEATING Member
1 March 2011
and 9 August 2011
ORDERS ISSUED
WRITTEN REASONS
August 2011
COMPLAINT No.
PRIDDLE Complainants
IP ELSON Respondent
Cracks in new house – whether due to adjacent trees
– claim of faulty engineering appraisal for Owner
REPRESENTATION
Complainants
Mr and Mrs RG Priddle
Mr I Tait (Counsel)
CASES REFERRED TO
THE DECISION
Cable (1956) v Hutcherson Bros Pty Ltd
[1969] HCA 37
(1969) 123 CLR 143
REASONS FOR DECISION AND ORDERS
1. BACKGROUND
1.1 The Complainants (the Owners) entered into an
agreement with the Respondent (the Builder) on 8 March 2006 for the construction
of a house on earthworks prepared by the Owners, at Capel in the southwest of
this State. The earthworks had been prepared according
to a plan produced by
consulting engineers, Structerre. A Certificate of Inspection by Structerre was
issued on completion of the
earthworks (see page 31 of our papers). The
certificate is dated 16 March 2006. The work had been done according to the
Structerre dated 30 April 2005 and attached plans (see pages 32-36).
The site was classified as a Class M site and the sand pad had
to be 800mm above
1.2 A cost plus contract for the erection of the house was then entered into by
the Builder (see pages 37-40) on or about 8 March
2006. The contract amount on
completion was $237,000 and the building was finished in December 2006. In or
throughout the house. The Builder has denied
responsibility.
2. EVIDENCE – HEARINGS OF 26 MARCH 2011 AND 9 AUGUST 2011
The Owners, at the first hearing, stated there were cracks over the whole
house but only on the inner walls. There were also plates
to hold the trusses
down to an inner wall. The cracks were all horizontal. The company which removed
the clay did not encounter any
roots. The cracks began to appear as soon as the
roof went on. They referred to the reports of Roger Patterson at pages 8 and 9
the file. There were also missing rods in the brick wall. They had engaged
Structerre to do the drawings and presented them to the
Builder. Also at the
southeast corner there was a gap 500mm long by 130mm of dry sand between the
slab and the footings. The bricks
were laid on the sand and not on the slab. The
gap was due to the house not being exactly on the slab at the corner. The Shire
Capel inspection report was at page 56.
2.2.1 The Builder – through his Counsel – stated that the footings
were built in accordance with the Structerre designs.
The trusses should not be
attached to the walls but that did not change his opinion that the underlying
soil was the problem. The
report by WML Consultants (pages 102-128) refers to
tree roots causing a fall from north to south. There is no complaint about
workmanship
in the Structerre report. The Builder claimed the cracking was the
result of the design of the foundations and not due to defective
workmanship.
The design having been carried out by someone else then there is no nexus
between the building work and the cracking.
The Builder further stated he had
paid the person selected to do the earthworks as it was a cost plus job. He had
no way of knowing
that the design was inadequate if he builds in accordance with
the design. There must be a causative link between the Builder, the
Engineer and
the defect. The key to design is an appropriate footing
2.2.2 Stephen Woodhouse – Mr Woodhouse gave evidence on his report from
page 102 onwards. His address is 10 Trinity Rise, Bunbury
and he works for WML
Constructions. There was a pad between the house and the ground. There were also
a collection of mature trees
on the boundary with the neighbour which would have
an influence, causing the clay to shrink. Clay is never 100% dry. He concluded
building was constructed properly except for the trusses
but they were insignificant. Remedying the problem could be done in a number
ways with the best solution being to put in a root barrier between the house and
the adjacent property. The trees had not been
taken into account in the design
of the footings. The barrier could lead to more water under the house causing
heave. The waterproof
membrane under the sand pad did not consider the effect of
the trees or that the clay would not be recharged with water from winter
The absence of cracks on the outer walls could materialise in the future as the
strain tells. In answer to questions he said
that clay is an active material
with a constant water content down to 3 or 4 metres. The depth of the summer
influence is about 2ms.
If uniform across the site then the whole site moves.
Taking the trees away will take ten years for the site to recover so a 3- metre
deep trench with a polythene barrier would be the quickest solution. In answer
to the Owners he said that if there were no rods in
the walls then that could
cause cracking.
2.3 At the second hearing the Owners referred to a report of Mr Jones at page
185, where he referred several apparent deficiencies
in the construction of the
house. Mr Jones was not called to give evidence, but the Owner emphasised that
the biggest problem was
the lack of reinforcement in the walls assed from an
estimated deficiency in the total length of rods to be ordered as required and
the actual length as appeared from bills paid under the contract. The evidence
of lack of steel was shown in the photographs and
the walls had been tested with
a metal detector.
The Builder referred to updated plans and there
was confusion over which ones were being referred to. The updated plans referred
the trusses. Gables were not drawn on the plans. The alleged absence of
triple grips in the roof had been attended to. The trusses
were installed on the
outside leaf of the wall. The Builder had sighted part of the pouring of the
slab before having to leave for
another commitment.
The Owner reiterated that the house had been largely stable for five years
now. With several months of rain there is no movement at
present. There are only
two vertical cracks in the house yet the CSIRO in its reports said that with
soil movement, there would be
vertical cracks. The worst room was the
2.4 In his submissions the Counsel for the Builder said there was no evidence
from persons present at the time to confirm that the
allegations of the Owner as
to lack of rods was correct. All rods are there. There was nothing in the papers
to show how many and
what length of rods were needed.
2.5 The Builder recalled Mr Woodhouse to give further evidence. He referred to
the points made at page 225. These were:
reinforcement is in the top of the brickwork and is designed to control soil
movement where clay is involved, thus anticipating
foundation movement.
trusses, the photo at page 187 is upside down.
truss should not be load-bearing on inner walls.
had not observed the absence of triple grips.
was no evidence of swaying of the building.
cornice cracks were not of structural relevance.
He further noted that his first measurements were taken in June and on his
revisit there was an increase in cracks. There was evidence
they will continue
to grow. The recovery of clay with increased rains would take many seasons. This
was a site with a moderate plasticity
of clay. There was a need to make
inspections over a long period of time. He still maintained the problems were
due to the effect
of the trees. With reference to Mr Jones’s report, he
could not see how the trusses fixed to the walls could cause the amount
damage seen in this house.
3. CONSIDERATION OF EVIDENCE
There were several reports in the papers which were referred to. These
Patterson, who made his first report on 20 October 2009. He found a 7mm
deflection to the level of the slab at the study doorway
under the central load-
bearing wall. The large number of cracks indicated a general settling of the
slab and footings. He felt that
the house would continue to settle as the
subsurface water table rises and falls with seasonal change. His solution was to
the site with a chemical injection of the underlying sand at a 2-metre
grid throughout the house.
In a second report on 21 January 2010
after inspecting the roof space, he found that the trusses which were designed
to span the full
width of the house did in fact bear on the central study wall
and the rear hallway wall and should be corrected prior to any remedial
fixing. However he made no comment on whether this had any relationship to the
cracking of other walls.
Structerre,
on 2 November 2007 made a report for the Builder in which it ascribed the
movement evidence by both horizontal and stepped
cracking as due to the
proximity of the soak-well to bedroom 1, which could in effect double the
surface movement. It was strongly
recommended that the storm-water be piped
A second report on 4 February 2008 found more cracks but that
the soak-well had been removed to 9 metres away from the site as previously
recommended. This time the author, Mr Johnstone found the cracking to be due to
the seasonal moisture change causing movement of
the clay. He also referred to
the site as Class H but found that the cracking did not exceed 5mm which was
“considered not
unacceptable for Class H sites”. The maximum width
found by him was 1.8mm.
Fitzgerald of Harman Timber Protruss – Although not an engineer he noted
in a letter of 20 April 2010 that there was also
cracking of “tiles on
floor at front of house and rear of house.”
letter dated 15 April 2009 to the Builder from the Owner, Ralph Priddle, the
author remarks that Structerre had changed their
classification of the site from
‘M’ to ‘H’ and also remarked that the submersible pump
had been working all
summer, “so I find it hard to understand how the
so-called ‘clay shrinkage’ crates the problem in the
Woodhouse of WML Consultants – This was the report commissioned by the
Builder on which the author gave evidence at the hearing.
It is noted that there
were two inspections (in June and September 2010) and that at the second
attendance, additional cracks had
occurred and others had enlarged in width. The
number involved were noted in red ink on drawings (at pages 112-122) and with
exception of the last drawing, were shown on a map of the house at page 112.
The conclusion of the witness was that while the fixing
of the trusses may or
may not have contributed to the cracking the observed distress is consistent
with a shrinking foundation on
the southern side of the house which was the
likely result of trees on the adjacent property sucking out the moisture. The
were observed in the sand layer below the house in the test hole of which
the only comment was “Tree roots were encountered
in the sand
layer”. The hole was dug at the southern side of the house but exactly
where is not indicated. The laboratory tests
showed that “the clay below
the house is of intermediate plasticity, that is clay with a medium capacity for
shrinkage and
swelling dependent upon the moisture content.” A dry clay
was present but the
moisture content increased with depth which
would lead to a drop in the level of the footing. The sandfill was 900mm thick
and complied
with Structerre’s requirements for a minimum of
Sturmer – The Inspector made an inspection on 17 August 2010. He
summarised the faults with the exception of those
in the bathroom as not being
consistent with movement from standard settlement but made no further comment on
the likely cause. However
he did indicate that where the floor was concerned
there were four cracked floor tiles – one in the entry foyer and three on
the laundry floor. He also identified “some cracking in mortar joints in
the face brickwork in the garage along the south wall
by the personnel door into
the house and on the west wall on either side of the built-in cupboards”.
It was not significant
but the Inspector felt it was related to the other
cracking in the house. A plan was attached at page 137.
Pty Ltd (page 173) and WML Consultants (page 172) – A survey at page 173
by Survcom made on 20 January 2011 is confusing
because it shows a rise of 6-7mm
on the north side and a 1mm rise to the south side. On the east or front of the
house there is a
3mm drop and to the rear on the west side a 1mm drop. So far
from an indication of the clay contracting on the south side it has
static while the north side has expanded. The front and back of the house have
settled minimally. Alternatively the original
levels of the house were not exact
across the centre of the house. The comments by WML Consultants at page 172
states the survey
indicates a fall from the north to the south which is correct,
but evidence is not available as to how this occurred and as to whether
was laid like that or what the original levels were when the walls were
4.1 Lawyers for the Builder have supplied a legal
opinion as to the issue of the liability of the Builder if he follows exactly
plans provided to him by the Owners. In particular they have relied on Cable
(1956) v Hutcherson Bros Pty Ltd
[1969] HCA 37
(1969) 123 CLR 143
where the High Court held
that where the contractor is employed to execute work in accordance with a
detailed design prepared by
the proprietor’s architect
prima facie
it will be incumbent upon the contractor to perform the work specified. It
is accepted therefore in this matter that in accordance
with the Cable case, if
the Builder can prove that he carried out the work properly and in a workmanlike
manner as shown in the drawings,
then he is not responsible for problems which
arise out of the design of the footings. That design was carried out by
for the Owners and not for the Builder. The issue therefore is as to
whether the cracking arises out of the effect of ground movement
for which the
footings were inadequate to cope with that movement, or out of some failure in
the construction of the building by
the Builder.
4.2 Further attention was drawn to warranties in the General Conditions at
clause 2 which reads:
“2. The Proprietor expressly warrants that the Particulars of Work
hereinbefore set forth are accurate and correct in each and
every respect and
acknowledges that it is upon the basis of such warranties that the Builder has
entered into this Contract.”
5. ANALYSIS OF EVIDENCE
5.1 The house was built between 14 March 2006 and
December 2006. The first complaint about cracking came within the first quarter
of 2007 although the Owners, in evidence, said that cracking started immediately
after the roof had been placed. Whenever, it is
clear that cracking was clearly
evident within a few months of the completion date at the very most.
5.2 The first inspection by Roger Paterson was on 2 November 2007 (page 8). He
thought it was a question of subsidence due to water
in the ground. The argument
then carried on with no firm conclusions as to the cause and no acceptance of
responsibility by anyone.
A Structerre report of 5 December 2008 (page 24)
referred to it as an ‘H’ Class site and stated the cracking was not
unacceptable for such a site. The original assessment of the site done by
Structerre required a membrane over the base of the whole
building site and an
800mm sand pad above the cut base (pages 32-35). It also required wall ties for
a Class ‘M’. The
Builder insisted on a 900mm high sand pad and this
requirement and the membrane were followed through. A Structerre compaction
certificate
of 30 March 2006 certified that the compaction of the sand pad had
been performed satisfactorily (page 57). The only query to that
stage arose as a
result of an inspection by the Shire of Capel of 11 April 2006 (page 56) which
stated that
“wrong internal thickening ordered – unable to
footings and Builder will get more to the thickenings. Roger OK to this.”
Further down there was the additional comment,
“Unable to lay all
internal thickening mesh – so slab mesh not in place as yet 11-4. SL 72 on
and then in relation to slab thickening reinforcement was the
“only 1200mm from ex footing”
against a tick in the
“not comply” box. From this it was evident that the slab did not
entirely comply with the plans
while in the course of construction. No further
inspections took place, nor were there any letters to the Shire to advise
had occurred. The Builder said it did comply but had no reports to
back up his statement.
5.3 Then came the initial report of Mr Woodhouse of WML Consultants, an
engineering firm of Bunbury. Mr Woodhouse excavated a test
hole to the south
side of the foundations and (at page 105) noted the sandfill was 900mm thick;
the compaction tests indicated that
the compaction of sand was as per the
specification; the footing depth and form appeared to be as required; tree roots
were encountered
in the sand layer; and the waterproofing membrane was present.
From the report the date of appearance of the cracks was not made
known to the
engineers (page 104). There was no comment anywhere as to the differences that
might occur between cracking early in
2007 and cracking that was obvious and had
increased slightly at the inspections of 10 June and 1 September 2010. For any
suspected cause to be present in 2010 it was assumed to have been the
same situation existing some three years earlier. In effect
the position as it
existed in 2010 was assumed to have been the position in 2007 when the cracking
occurred and to have been steadily
getting worse. That assumes that the tree
roots had already grown into the sand pad by early 2007 when they were not
apparent when
the pad was put down in early 2006 according to the Owners. An
examination of the photograph of the hole (page 109) shows minimal
the comment at page 105 did not make any mention of large tree roots. Neither
were any other holes dug at other sites
along the side of the pad adjacent to
the trees. For these reasons we have to reject any effect of the trees, at the
time the cracking
first appeared, either in extracting groundwater to an
excessive extent or in physically affecting the foundations. Nonetheless this
not to say that at some time in the future tree roots might have an effect on
the building but they could not have been the cause
of this cracking in 2007 and
subsequently. A proper assessment of the type of trees, whether they have
surface roots as with most
native species or more deep rooting types, would be
needed by a trained arborist. No such claims were made by the engineers as to
their qualifications in this area.
5.4 The second issue concerns whether the presence of clay in the soil had been
incorrectly assessed by the engineers, who had done
the original plans, namely
Structerre. The original Certificate of Inspection is at page 50 of our papers
and was dated 30 April
2005. No evidence was called to support this assessment.
The report was dated 30 April 2005 and stated:
“The site has been assessed as a Class ‘M’ site. As such
it is recommended to use the attached slab and footing
detail M2 upon normal
earthworks ensuring compliance
with the notes and information on the detail. Normal earthworks include
but are not limited to:
all rubbish, organic material and deleterious fill such as clay fill from the
Grubbing out
of any trees and ensuring the remaining holes are compacted
satisfactorily
the engineer of any unusual features or discrepancies which may become
evident during earthworks prior to proceeding
The sand pad is to be 800mm above cut level.”
Four bore holes were dug to analyse the soil and the base had to be inspected
and approved by an engineer from Structerre.
No evidence was called to either substantiate or fault this Certificate and
it is therefore accepted at face value as a proper assessment.
No evidence was
given that any of the requirements as to the earthworks were not followed
through other than that the Builder insisted
on a 900mm sand pad which was
accepted in the plans. The requirements for wall ties were shown as at page 54
in “Typical Wall
Intersections”.
A Structerre Certificate of Inspection is at page 31 and certified that as at
16 March 2006 the base had been properly prepared. At
page 57 is the Structerre
Certificate that the pad had been properly compacted.
Attention was drawn to a letter from Structerre Bunbury Office of 2 November
2007 (pages 59-60) when a representative at the request
of the Builder visited
the site and inspected the cracking. His report was clearly visual only. He was
not called to give evidence
by the Builder to whom the report was
At page 24 is a further report from Structerre Bunbury dated 4 February 2008
and made to the Builder. The author, Mr Johnstone assessed
all the cracks and
stated at paragraph 3,
“The cracking is the resultant movement of the
clay that has occurred and is due to seasonal moisture change as the seasonal
moisture regimes adjust to the site conditions”
and then in paragraph
“Cracking up to 5mm is considered not unacceptable for
‘H’ class sites as the cracking on site does not exceed the
unacceptable range, it is considered to fall within the realm of homeowner
maintenance”.
As no assessment of the soil had been made, the
assumption of an ‘H’ Class site was questionable at the very least.
author was not called to give evidence.
Accordingly, neither the Builder nor the Owner at any stage either confirmed
or questioned the plans as drawn by Structerre or that
the original assessments
were wrong. No evidence was given on this aspect and the Tribunal accepts that
the original work done by
Structerre was correct, no proof having been given
that any aspect was wrong.
5.5 We are left with the proposition of the Owner that the cause is due to the
tying in of the trusses of the roof onto the walls
and lack of reinforcing bars
in the brickwork. As to a cause for the cracking, engineers from Structerre have
said in their letters
that the cracking is acceptable for a clay site. The
Builders Registration Board Inspector’s report at page 132 stated that
there were suggestions of “subsidence” on the south side of the
house adjacent to the trees. In general however, the
Inspector had assessed the
cracking to be faulty (pages 130-132).
At a later date a survey was made on 20 January 2011 by Survcon Pty Ltd (page
170). The top of the plan is the west side, the right-hand
side (adjacent to the
trees) is the south side and so on.
At this stage it is noted that no confirmation of the correction of the Capel
Shire reports of deficiencies had been made and no confirmation
was produced by
the Builder that the level of the concrete pads was normal or within any
tolerance of several millimetres.
Accordingly the survey assumes that the level in the passageway in the centre
of the house was 00, that the south side was +1mm, the
north side +7mm at the
kitchen, the east side at the back of the house was -1mm and the front door
-3mm. All evidence appeared to
assume that the south side had dropped by 6mm at
the study. The surveyor quite rightly stated the survey “assumed”
centre at the passageway to be
00. There is no evidence at all to provide any basis for accepting this
conclusion. At the expiry of 4½ years the only evidence
we have is that the
concrete pad is not level but not to any exceptional extent.
It is also noted that evidence was given by the Owner of incorrect fixings of
the trusses to certain walls; of a lack of the required
number of reinforcing
bars at one place in the wall (see photos at page 187) and a placing of the
building at an angle over the footings
(see photo at page 188). While none of
these by themselves would necessarily cause the cracking to the extent that has
they were evidence of improper and unworkmanlike construction which
was not appropriate for a Class ‘M’ site. Lastly
it is noted that in
all the allegations about the effect of moisture or the lack of it on the site,
no evidence was led as to the
amount of rainfall in the area before, during and
immediately after the construction of the house and at the time the cracking
All the technical evidence related to the period after the cracking
occurred and could only be relevant if proved as to the effect
existing cracking. Some cracks were to be expected with a Class ‘M’
site as Structerre had stated. We do not
accept however, as with the Inspector
of the Builders Registration Board, that the cracks are of an acceptable number.
They are far
in excess and the Builder is therefore in breach of Section 12A of
the Builders
Registration Act
in that the workmanship is faulty and
unsatisfactory. The design of the base and footings has not been proved in any
way to be at
fault. Therefore the cases cited by the Builder do not apply. The
Builder accordingly must make good to the cracking which fortunately
structurally unsound.
There will be Orders as follows:
Builder is to remedy the cracking to all affected areas of the house and to make
good to the areas concerned.
Builder to complete all work within 28 days of the date of these
MR D A FORRESTER
Deputy Chairperson
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (910 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
PDF format (47.9 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter