URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WASAT/2025/112.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:06:58
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
O'NEIL and THE OWNERS OF GLOUCESTER COURT ORELIA STRATA PLAN 34649 [2025] WASAT 112 (15 October 2025)
STATE ADMINISTRATIVE
STRATA TITLES ACT 1985
O'NEIL and THE OWNERS OF GLOUCESTER COURT ORELIA STRATA
[2025] WASAT 112
MS N OLDFIELD, MEMBER
DETERMINED ON THE DOCUMENTS
DELIVERED :
15 OCTOBER 2025
FILE NO/S :
CC 838 of 2024
LISA ANNE O'NEIL
THE OWNERS OF GLOUCESTER COURT ORELIA STRATA PLAN 34649
Strata titles - Preliminary issue - 'Scheme
dispute' - Whether applicant is a 'scheme participant' - Sale of lot
Legislation:
State Administrative Tribunal Act 2004
Strata Titles Act 1985
s 197(2)(g)
, Sch 1, Sch 2
Application dismissed
Representation:
Solicitors:
Case(s) referred to in decision(s):
Blaszkiewicz and The Owners of 7 Henderson Street Fremantle (Strata
Scheme 74918)
[2021] WASAT 56
Cartner and Craig
[2020] WASAT 101
FOR DECISION OF THE TRIBUNAL
Introduction
O'Neil claimed the failure to repair a water leak emanating from common property
caused damage to her unit. She commenced these
proceedings seeking compensation
from the strata company.
Issue for determination
Tribunal ordered the following be determined as a preliminary issue.
(a) Does the Tribunal have jurisdiction to determine this
proceeding if Ms O'Neil no longer owns the unit?
Statutory framework
Strata Titles Act 1985
) provides for the
resolution by the Tribunal of scheme disputes.
'scheme dispute' is defined to mean a dispute between scheme participants
regarding various matters arising under the ST Act including
the failure to
perform functions conferred on a person by the ST Act and an alleged
contravention of the ST
'scheme participant' is defined to
(a) the strata company for the strata titles scheme;
(b) for a leasehold scheme, the owner of the leasehold scheme;
(c) a person who is appointed as an administrator of a strata company for the
strata titles scheme;
(d) a member of the strata company for the strata titles scheme;
(e) the occupier of a lot in the strata titles scheme;
(f) the registered mortgagee of a lot in the strata titles scheme;
(g) a member of the council of a strata company, or
an officer of the strata company, for the strata titles scheme, who is not a
of the strata company.
is meant by the words 'member of the strata company' is addressed by s 14(8) of
the ST Act which states:
A strata company is comprised of the owners for the time being of the lots in
the strata titles scheme (who are the members of the
strata company).
Tribunal ordered the preliminary issue be determined entirely on the documents
pursuant to
State Administrative Tribunal Act 2004
reaching a decision I have had regard to all of the documents filed by the
parties in this matter, but most particularly:
(a) the application
filed by Ms O'Neil on 20 November 2024 and the documents attached to that
application;
(b) the bundle of documents filed by Ms O'Neil on 30 June 2025;
(c) the submissions filed by Ms O'Neil on 9 September 2025;
(d) the submissions filed by the Strata Company on
24 September 2025.
Material facts
findings as to the material facts are as follows. These facts were not
plan 34649 (the
strata plan
) was registered on 9 July 1998 and is named
Gloucester Court Orelia. The Owners of Gloucester Court Orelia Strata Plan
Strata Company
) is the strata company for the strata scheme
created by the registration of the strata plan (the
strata scheme
O'Neil became the registered proprietor of Lot 5 of the strata plan (the
) on 28 May 2007.
O'Neil commenced these proceedings by filing her application on 20 November
of the sale of the unit occurred on 11 February 2025. As from that date,
Ms O'Neil ceased being the registered proprietor
The parties' contentions
O'Neil's contentions are summarised as follows:
(a) What matters, in
terms of the Tribunal's jurisdiction, is the position at the time the
proceedings were commenced. Jurisdiction
once enlivened is not lost.
(b) Scheme participants under s 197(2) include members of the strata company
and members of the council of owners who are not members
of the strata
(c) The decision in
Blaszkiewicz and The Owners of 7 Henderson Street
Fremantle (Strata Scheme 74918)
[2021] WASAT 56
Blaszkiewicz
) is not relevant because in that decision the
applicant had ceased to be an owner (by virtue of having lodged the transfer of
at Landgate) prior to lodging their application.
(d) Ms O'Neil was the registered proprietor of the unit, and a member of the
strata scheme, at the time of lodgement.
(e) The Tribunal had jurisdiction at the time of lodgement and so retains
contentions of the Strata Company are summarised as follows:
ST Act by s 197(1) provides the Tribunal with jurisdiction to resolve scheme
disputes and outlines the types of disputes which
constitute a scheme
(b) The ST Act identifies the persons who can be scheme participants for the
purposes of s 197(1). A scheme participant includes
a member of the strata
company for the strata titles scheme.
(c) Section 14(8) provides that a member of a strata company means an owner
for the time being of lots in the strata titles scheme.
Section 3 of the ST Act
provides that an owner is a person who is registered as the proprietor.
(d) The words 'for the time being' must mean that the relevant time is when
the Tribunal makes a determination, not the point at which
the application is
Blaszkiewicz
decision is authority for the position
that the Tribunal does not have jurisdiction to resolve a scheme dispute where
the applicant
is no longer a scheme participant.
(f) Therefore, the application should be dismissed.
Consideration
submissions of Ms O'Neil suggest that she is a scheme participant by virtue of
paragraphs (d) or (g) of the definition of that
term. I will consider each in
Member of the strata company - paragraph (d)
of a lot 'for the time being' is to be determined by the details contained the
Certificate of Title for a lot in a strata
purchasers of the unit became the registered proprietors on 11 February
2025. At that point, Ms O'Neil ceased to be the registered
proprietor of the
unit and therefore was no longer a member of the strata company.
O'Neil cited seven previous decisions of the Tribunal as authority for her
contention that the Tribunal cannot lose jurisdiction.
However, none contained
the decisions or the principles for which Ms O'Neil contends. They do not
assist her case.
my view there is no basis for the proposition the Tribunal cannot lose
Cartner and Craig
the Tribunal
did not have jurisdiction to determine a matter under the ST Act because
one of the parties became a resident of another
state. It was held that even if
the Tribunal had jurisdiction at the commencement of the proceeding, its
if the basis for that jurisdiction
This is but
one example of many.
Accordingly,
the conclusion is unavoidable. When Ms O'Neil ceased to be a member of the
strata company:
(a) her dispute with the Strata Company ceased to be
a scheme dispute within the meaning of the ST Act; and
(b) the Tribunal no longer had jurisdiction to determine the matter under the
terms of the ST Act.
Officer and council of a strata company - paragraph (g)
simplicity, from hereon I will refer to the council of the strata company as
'the council' and an officer of the strata company
as 'an officer'.
have taken the submissions of Ms O'Neil to suggest that:
(a) under s
197(2)(g) a member of the council or an officer can be a scheme participant even
if they are not a member of the relevant
strata company;
(b) therefore, if she held either of those positions in relation to the
strata scheme;
(c) her sale of the unit would not affect the jurisdiction of
the Tribunal in relation to this proceeding.
is no evidence before the Tribunal to suggest whether or not Ms O'Neil is
(or was) an officer or a member of the council in
relation to the strata scheme.
Therefore, it could have been suggested this argument failed for not disclosing
a factual basis.
However, as this was not raised by the Strata Company, Ms
O'Neil is not legally represented and the early stage of the proceedings,
considered the legal basis upon which the claim might be
What does s 197(2)(g) mean?
noted above, s 197(2)(g) of the ST Act states that a scheme participant
a member of the council of a strata company, or an officer of the strata
company, for the strata titles scheme, who is not a member
strata company
'officer of a strata company' is defined by the ST Act to mean the chairperson,
any secretary or any treasurer of the strata
eligibility to be, and process of appointment of, an officer and a member of
council is contained in the by-laws rather than
the ST Act. The terms of the
by-laws contained in schedules 1 and 2 of the ST Act are relevant to the
interpretation of s 197(2)(g).
by-law 4 includes the following:
(a) The council is first comprised
of all the lot owners, up to the first annual general meeting.
(b) Where there are no more than three lot owners, the council is to comprise
of all three owners. Where there are more than three
lot owners, the council is
to comprise between three and seven lot owners.
(c) A member of the council vacates their position on the council if they
cease to be an owner or co-owner of a lot.
by-law 6 includes the following:
(a) At the first meeting of the
council after the council members assume office, they must appoint a
chairperson, secretary and treasurer
of the council. No-one can be appointed to
those positions unless they are a member of the council.
(b) The appointed chairperson, secretary and treasurer will lose their
position if they cease to be a member of the council.
by-law 7 provides that the chairperson, secretary and treasurer of the council
are also the chairperson, secretary and
treasurer of the strata company.
members of the council are required to be lot owners. Therefore, an officer
must also be a lot owner.
ST Act provides for limited exceptions whereby a non-owner may perform the role
of a member of council or officer:
(a) If a lot owner cannot be
found or lacks the capacity to vote, the Public Trustee or another specified
person may be appointed
to act in their
(b) A corporation may authorise an individual to act on its behalf as an
officer or a member of the
my view, s 197(2)(g) is intended to apply to those exceptions, to ensure a
non-owner appointed to act would have standing as a
scheme participant. This is
(a) Other categories of scheme participants have a
connection to the relevant strata scheme. It is logical persons identified in
s 197(2)(g) would also have a connection to the strata scheme.
(b) Unlike s 85 and s 136 of the ST Act, s 197(2)(g) contains no rationale or
mechanism for the appointment of a non-owner.
(c) If the legislature had intended to expand the class of persons who might
act as an officer or a member of council, there would
have been specific
provision. It would be inconsistent with the ST Act to do so by way of s
is not alleged and there is no evidence either of s 85 or s 136 of the
ST Act applied to Ms O'Neil.
Does s 197(2)(g) assist Ms O'Neil?
was no evidence as to the by-laws which govern the strata scheme. If no by-laws
were registered with the strata plan in 1998,
then the by­laws as contained
in the ST Act applied. It appears amendments to the by-laws were first lodged
with Landgate on
3 January 2003. Accordingly, from that point the statutory
by-laws as amended by the Strata Company took effect. However, for the
of this matter, there are no relevant differences between those by-laws and the
governance by-laws contained in the ST Act.
197(2)(g) does not assist Ms O'Neil. If she were a member of council, her
position was vacated upon settlement of the sale
of the unit. If she had been
an officer, her position was vacated upon ceasing to be a member of the
upon registration of the sale of the unit, Ms O'Neil would have ceased to be an
officer or a member of the council. That
in turn meant:
would have ceased to be a scheme participant;
(b) the dispute ceased to be a 'scheme dispute' as defined in the
ST Act; and
(c) the Tribunal was no longer able to determine the dispute pursuant to the
terms of the ST Act.
Tribunal only has jurisdiction to determine disputes under the ST Act to
the extent permitted by the ST Act. At the point when
Ms O'Neil ceased to
be the registered owner of the unit, she ceased to be a 'scheme participant' as
defined in the ST Act. Therefore,
her claim against the Strata Company was no
longer a 'scheme dispute' as defined by the ST Act. Accordingly, the Tribunal
lost jurisdiction
to deal with this matter. Ms O'Neil may still pursue her
claims, but she must do so in another forum.
these reasons, I make the orders set out below.
The Tribunal orders:
Tribunal has determined, as a preliminary issue, that it does not have
being a scheme dispute
as defined by
Strata Titles Act 1985
proceeding is dismissed pursuant to
State Administrative
Tribunal Act 2004
(WA) as misconceived.
I certify that the preceding paragraph(s)
comprise the reasons for decision of the State Administrative Tribunal.
MS N Oldfield, MEMBER
15 OCTOBER 2025
ST Act, s 197(1)
but see also s
Blaszkiewicz
Cartner and Craig
[2020] WASAT 101
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (202 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter