URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WATPAT/2004/234.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:10:04
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Goode and Anor v Town of Cambridge [2004] WATPAT 234 (31 December 2004)
IN THE TOWN PLANNING
APPEAL TRIBUNAL OF
WESTERN AUSTRALIA
Appeal No. 246 of 2004
[2004] WATPAT 234
Heard: 13 December 2004
Decision: 31 December 2004
B E T W E E N:
NICHOLAS JOHN GOODE AND FRANCESCA ANTONIA GOODE
TOWN OF CAMBRIDGE
Ms M Connor
(Ordinary Member)
Development – Two storey single dwelling – Roof design non
compliant with Residential Design Guidelines – Contemporary
reflective of traditional styles and roof pitches in the locality
Cases referred to
Dalla Riva (Australia) Pty Ltd v Town of Vincent
[2004] WATPAT 4
Robert Lane and Christine Black v Town of Cambridge
[2004] WATPAT
Geoffrey Gishubl v City of Subiaco
[2003] WATPAT 61
Moullin v Town of Cottesloe
[2002] WATPAT 23
McDonald v Town of East Fremantle
[2002] WATPAT 26
Appearances
Mr N Goode appeared in person
Mr P Bracone (Agent) appeared for the Respondent
The Tribunal:
1. This appeal was instituted against the refusal of the Town of Cambridge
the Respondent
”) to grant planning approval for a two
storey single dwelling on Lot 276 (Strata Lot 1) (No 164A) Jersey Street,
the subject land
2. The Respondent, at its Council Meeting of 24 August 2004, resolved not to
approve the planning application in its present form
for the following
“(a) non compliance with clauses 8.3.5 and 8.3.6 of
the Residential Design Guidelines.”
3. The Respondent also resolved that it would be prepared to give favourable
consideration to amended plans that modified the roof
design to comply with
clauses 8.3.5 and 8.3.6 of the Residential Design Guidelines. Authorisation was
given by the Respondent to
the Chief Executive Officer to approve the
application for a two storey dwelling on the subject land as shown on plans
dated 11 June
2004 subject to the roof design being modified to accord with the
requirements of the Design Guidelines.
4. The Appellants by Notice of Appeal dated 15 October 2004 appealed against the
Respondent’s decision.
The Subject Land
5. The subject land was created following the survey strata subdivision of the
parent lot, Lot 276 Jersey Street, Wembley into two
lots. Both survey strata
lots are currently vacant.
6. The subject land is 400m
in area with a 14.12 metre frontage to
Jersey Street. A battleaxe leg that services the survey strata lot at the rear
extends along
the southern boundary of the subject land.
7. The owners of the subject land are Nicholas Goode and Francesca
The Nature of the Proposal
8. The proposal before the Tribunal involves the construction of a contemporary
style two storey single house on the subject land.
The main living areas, main
bedroom, a home office and double garage are situated on the ground floor level
and an activity room
and two bedrooms are proposed on the upper floor level.
9. It is the Tribunal’s understanding, based on the evidence given by Mr
Bracone that the only aspect of this proposal in dispute
is the roof design
which does not comply with the Acceptable Development requirements of the Town
of Cambridge Residential Design
Guidelines (“
10. Mr Goode described the roof as “multiple skillions” pitched at
12 degrees.
Planning Framework
Local Scheme
11. The subject land is zoned Urban under the Metropolitan Region Scheme and
residential development is an appropriate use in the
Urban zone.
12. Development of the subject land is also governed by the Town of Cambridge
Town Planning Scheme No.1 (“
”). The property is
currently zoned Residential with a permitted site density of R20 as illustrated
on the Scheme Maps. In
the Zone Table contained in the Scheme, the use class
Single Dwelling is classified as a P (permitted) use in the Residential zone
as such, the proposed development is a permitted use.
13. Under clause 33 of the Scheme the erection of a single dwelling where the
proposed use is designated as a P use is exempt from
planning approval except
where the application requires the exercise of discretion under the Residential
Design Codes (“
Design Codes
”) or a Planning Policy relating
to the erection of a single house. The matter came to be determined by the
Respondent as the
proposal involves variations to the side setback, visual
variation to the roof pitch and wall height requirements of the Design
Guidelines.
14. Unless otherwise consistent with a planning approval, clause 18 of the
Scheme requires the development of land to be in accordance
with standards and
requirements contain in the Scheme Text, the Planning Policies and the Design
15. Clause 10 of the Scheme divides the Scheme Area into precincts and notes
that for each precinct there is a planning policy contained
Council’s Policy Manual. The subject land is located in precinct
“P4 Wembley”. This precinct area is further
divided into sub
precincts in the Design Guidelines Precinct Statements and the subject land lies
within “Sub Precinct 4B –
Wembley Central”.
16. Pursuant to clause 19 of the Scheme, the Design Codes are to be read as part
of the Scheme and development of land for residential
purposes dealt with by the
Design Codes is to conform to the provisions of those Codes.
17. Subclause 38(3) of the Scheme provides the powers for the Council to refuse
or approval an application either unconditionally
or subject to such conditions
as the Council considers appropriate. Without limiting the scope of the
discretion to determine an
application, subclause 38(4) of the Scheme sets out
the matters to which regard is to be given in the determination of an
application.
The pertinent matters relating to this application are as
“ (a) the provisions of this Scheme and of any
other written law applying within the Scheme area including the Metropolitan
Region Scheme;
(b) any relevant planning policy;
(e) any submission accompanying or related to the application;
(f) the orderly and proper planning of the locality;
(g) the conservation of the amenities of the locality; and
(h) the design, scale and relationship to existing buildings and surroundings
of any proposed building or structure.”
18. Clause 48 of the Scheme empowers the Council to make planning policies
relating to an aspect or aspects of development control
or any other matter
relevant to the Scheme, which may be applied to all or part of the Scheme area.
The Design Guidelines, referred
to in the refusal of this application, have been
adopted by the Respondent pursuant to clause 48.
Residential
Design Guidelines
19. The relevant section of the Design Guidelines relating to this appeal is
headed Architectural Character. The broad aim is to
“ensure that new
development is respectful of existing character, whilst allowing for
contemporary design”. There then
follows what are described as guidance
notes and in clause 8.3 there are compliance standards. This materially
provides as follows:
“Development which meets these
standards, in addition to the requirement of the R-Codes, will be approved by
the Council. Where
no standard is prescribed, the requirement of the R-Codes
shall prevail....
8.3.5 Primary roofs visible from the street shall be hipped or gabled, or a
combination of the two.
8.3.6 The pitch of primary roofing visible from the street shall be between
22 degrees and 35 degrees.”
20. The Performance Criteria allow approval of dwellings that do not meet the
compliance standards but which demonstrate:
(a) for all
precincts, under 8.4(a):
“buildings which respect the height, massing and roof pitches of
existing housing in the street and locality;” and
(b) specifically for Wembley and West Leederville at 8.4(d):
“buildings with contemporary and modern interpretations of pitched
roofs such as skillion or vaulted roofs which reflect traditional
roof pitches.”
Planning Issues
21. The principal planning issue identified by the Respondent in this appeal
relates to the roof design of the proposed dwelling.
The Respondent asserted
that roof pitch is an important and significant element in the design and
appearance of dwellings and incorporated
provisions into the Design Guidelines
to ensure that the traditional character of an area could be maintained.
22. The Respondent contended that the proposed skillion roof with a 12 degree
pitch does not reflect the traditional styles and roof
pitches in the locality
and is not respectful of the predominant character of the neighbourhood, which
will result in an adverse
impact on the streetscape and locality. Mr Bracone
established under cross examination of Mr Goode that the predominant roof pitch
in Jersey Street is 25 degrees and that there are only three dwellings out of
approximately 150 dwellings along Jersey Street that
do not have a roof pitch
compliant with the range specified in the Design Guidelines.
23. The Respondent maintained that since the adoption of the Design Guidelines
in 1998, the Council had not approved any variations
to the roof pitch
requirements in the Wembley Central Sub Precinct and in the broader Wembley
Precinct, had only approved three applications
for dwellings with roof pitches
higher or lower than the required 22 to 35 degrees.
24. Evidence was also called by the Respondent from two, long term local
residents of Jersey Street. Both residents expressed concern
in terms of its style and design and contended that the proposed dwelling was
not in keeping with other houses
in the street which would have an undesirable
impact on the streetscape and character of Jersey Street. From the evidence, it
obvious that the concerns of both residents were not limited to the roof
element of the proposed dwelling, as other issues such as
the use of materials
and height were identified.
25. Mr Goode contended that his major design considerations were solar
efficiency and reducing the bulk of the building, achieved
by reducing the size
of the upper floor resulting in less bulking and allowing northern aspects. The
design of the dwelling also
assisted in keeping the overall height of the
dwelling to not more than 900mm above the existing (single storey) roofline of
26. Mr Goode described the roof as a contemporary design involving multiple
skillions. He contended that the Performance Criteria
established in clause
8.4(d) of the Design Guidelines is addressed in the design as the roof reflects
roof pitches in the immediate
vicinity and is a contemporary interpretation of a
gable roof. Mr Goode identified two dwellings, Nos 160 and 154 Jersey Street,
which have roof pitches of approximately 12 degrees and produced photographs of
other examples of both contemporary and older style
dwellings in the Wembley and
West Leederville area with lower pitched roofs than that specified in the Design
Guidelines.
27. Mr Goode asserted that the Design Guidelines are a guide only which provide
scope to support contemporary design, referring
to the following statement
contained in clause 8.2.1:
“In areas of established and
attractive architectural character, it is tempting for the Council to insist
that new development
simply imitates the style of existing houses. However,
this approach not only stifles creative contemporary design and goes against
human desire for progressive change in the environment, but all too often fails
in its own terms. Too often, instead of high
quality design the result is
simply poor imitations of past styles. This tendency can be seen in the many
“Federation”
and “Colonial” project houses springing
Consequently, the Guidelines stress the importance of integrity in design
along with respect for existing character, which can be
expressed in either of
(a) by a genuine application of or reference to the established style, and
its common elements; or
(b) by adopting a contemporary style which is still respectful of the
established character.”
28. In support of this contention, Mr Goode produced a list containing 19
planning applications within the Wembley and Leederville
areas where the
Respondent, since the adoption of the Design Guidelines, has supported pitched
roofs outside the range specified.
29. Mr Goode also referred to the report of the Respondent’s planning
officers which was presented to the Council at its meeting
of 24 August 2004,
which states the following:
“Council has previously
supported contemporary architectural design and that there are examples in
Wembley and West Leederville
of roof forms that do not meet the Acceptable
Development requirements.
In this particular case, it is considered that the proposed roofing is
supportable as it will provide a distinct and contemporary
elevation to the
streetscape... In addition, the low pitch will contribute to reducing overall
height, bulk and scale of the proposed
development.”
30. The planning officer’s report also included a recommendation that
Council approve the application as shown on the amended
plans dated 11 June 2004
noting variations to roof pitch, wall height, side setbacks, visual privacy and
retaining walls and filling
31. Mr Bracone in his witness statement and under cross examination stated that
he agreed with the report and recommendation from
the Respondent’s
Planning Section.
32. The Tribunal has previously deliberated the weight to be accorded to
recommendations of planning officers which differ from the
Respondent’s
determination of an application in
Dalla Riva (Australia) Pty Ltd v Town of
[2004] WATPAT 4
and held that:
“Whilst it is
true that that is what they are, namely recommendations, it is equally true that
they represent the considered
recommendations of professionally trained and
engaged employees.
It is accepted, without demur, that of course the decision at all times
remains the Respondent’s. When, however, the matter
is addressed by the
Tribunal on appeal there is proper scope to consider the reflective advice
provided to the Respondent in the
course of its consideration on and
deliberations about the relevant application. It is in no way determinative of
the matter before
the Tribunal but nevertheless represents a matter to which
regard ought to be had as a matter to be considered in the determination
appeal. To the extent to which there is discretion and therefore an element of
judgment, the views expressed on such matters
by qualified planners are of
assistance to the Tribunal.”
33. This decision gives clear guidance on the weight to be given in such
instances and as the recommendation of the Respondent’s
planning officers
forms part of the material before the Tribunal, regard will be given to the
views expressed in the determination
of this appeal.
34. The Tribunal, in
Robert Lane and Christine Black v Town of Cambridge
[2004] WATPAT 204
considered the usefulness of the Design Guidelines as an
instrument of planning policy and found it to be singularly
lacking. This
decision is of significance as it relates to the application of the Design
Guidelines in reaching a decision on the
very issue the
subject of this appeal.
35. The Tribunal was highly critical of the construction of the Design
Guidelines and found that “the Design Guidelines is
not sufficiently
useful as a planning policy for it to be given any real weight.” This
Tribunal supports the findings expressed
in regard to the Design
Guidelines and reiterates that the Respondent cannot simply argue that a
skillion roof should not be supported
because it does not reflect the
predominant roof pitch in the area when the Performance Criteria clearly
recognise contemporary interpretations
by way of skillion could be valid.
36. While expressing a preference to have some design elements included, such as
pitched roofs, the Respondent must recognise and
accept that not every
development must replicate or be the same or even look the same as all other
developments within the street.
The same view is expressed by the Tribunal in
McDonald v Town of East Fremantle
[2002] WATPAT 26
and reiterated
Geoffrey Gishubl v City of Subiaco
[2003] WATPAT 61.
37. The Tribunal has also previously pointed out in
Moullin v Town of
[2002] WATPAT 23
that there is no obligation that a new
development should in all respect comply with and be limited to the design
previous era.
38. Whilst it can be seen that the proposed roof is undoubtedly different from
the roof styles of the existing housing stock, that
itself cannot lead to the
conclusion that there is an adverse impact upon the streetscape. The Appellants
have attempted to design
a contemporary roof reflective of traditional styles
that being a gable roof, which emulates a roof pitch that is evident in the
immediate vicinity of the subject land. If the Design Guidelines were to be
applied, the Tribunal would say that the proposed roof
form satisfies the
Performance Criteria.
39. The Design Codes is another source of planning policy that can be taken into
consideration in the determination of this appeal
and that would allow approval
of the design with a skillion roof.
40. In considering the design, scale and relationship to existing buildings and
surroundings of any proposed building or structure,
the Tribunal concurs with
the views held by the Respondent’s planning officers that the low pitch
will contribute to reducing
the overall height, bulk and scale of the
development and its impact on adjoining properties and the streetscape.
41. In the context of the overall development, it is the Tribunal’s view
that the proposed roof, although contemporary in style,
will not have sufficient
impact on the visual amenity of the locality or the character of the street so
as to give rise to a reason
for refusing the development.
42. For the foregoing reasons, the appeal is upheld.
43. In accordance with the usual process, the parties have 14 days within which
to liaise as to the conditions to be imposed in relation
to this grant of
development approval.
44. In the event that the parties cannot agree, then the Appellants are at
liberty to apply to the Tribunal to determine the conditions
which should attach
to this approval.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (70.2 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter