URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WABDT/2011/68.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:55:58
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
ALAN & SARAH REAY and ANTONIO & GRACE PRINCI trading as PRINCI HOMES (Decision 18438, 18438/2, 19454, 19825) [2011] WABDT 68 (18 August 2011)
DISPUTES TRIBUNAL
MR D FORRESTER Deputy Chairperson MR N HARRISON Member
MR M CORNELL Member
4 July 2011 to 7
ORDERS ISSUED
WRITTEN REASONS
August 2011
18438, 18438/2, 19454, 19825
& SARAH REAY Complainants
and ANTONIO & GRACE PRINCI
trading as PRINCI HOMES Respondent
Section 12A of the Builders
Registration Act
Application for costs of remedying leaking to new building
REPRESENTATION
Complainants
Mr W Vogt , counsel of Vogt
Graham Lawyers Mr & Mrs Reay
Mr A Princi
Dr A Zurhar (Representative)
CASES REFERRED TO
THE DECISION
Not applicable
REASONS FOR DECISION
1. BACKGROUND
On or about 24 April 2003 the parties entered into a
contract for the construction of a double-storey house facing the beach at
Rocks in the northern suburbs. The construction was completed on or about
7 July 2004. Within a few months it had become apparent
that there were leaks
from several potential sources including windows, doors and the upper balcony
junction with the house. Initially
the Owners had also applied through their
lawyers to join the company that laid the tiles on the balcony, because of
allegations
that that company had omitted a waterproof membrane. That matter was
heard on 12 October 2010 and in a decision handed down on 20
October the
application was dismissed. The application was out of time. A major
consideration was that the Builder had at all times
admitted liability and had
not appealed an Order to Remedy No. 50/2008-09 issued on 11 August 2006, which
Order also included the
balcony. There have since been a number of attempts by
the Builder to solve the problems with only moderate success, and the matter
therefore been heard on an application by the Owners for Orders that the Builder
pay the costs of various quotations received
to complete repairs.
2. EVIDENCE OF OWNERS
The Complainants summarised their claims in a letter
from their solicitors dated 25 February 2011 at page 370 of our papers.
– The Owner submitted a written statement of his
evidence which is listed in our papers at pages 429-476, and compiled from
entries since the date when the Complainants had first seen the block for sale.
Several points were referred to including the
hearing which involved the alleged
liability of Primar Holdings, various Directions hearings, and the last report
of the Builders
Registration Board Inspector at pages 372-405 of our
2.2 At this stage the Owners’ legal representative brought in two
witnesses. These witnesses were
Andrew Charles Booth
of Housepect and
Paul Gronow
of the Builders Registration Board. The reports of Mr Booth
are at pages 328 and 348 of our papers. The report of Mr Gronow is at
Both witnesses spoke to their reports and Mr Gronow referred to an earlier
report at page 165 of our papers and dated 8
March 2010. He noted the
requirements for flashings and also the need for certification to show that the
windows had been constructed
to the correct wind and water penetrating ratings
and that the window seals and frame joints were without fault. He noted that
flashings had not been installed.
Mr Booth was unsure that
leaving the brickwork in place would solve the problem. With the balcony slab he
referred to page 329 and
said shrinkage cracks were evident in the slab but
there were no flashings to protect the windows and the front elevation was not
bricked in. He had looked at all the windows on the west elevation and there
were no sill trays. There was a lot of wind pressure
on the house.
Mr Gronow referred to his reports at pages 56 and 165 and with the windows a
new window upstairs could solve that problem. There was
no evidence about the
balcony slab having a crack. He saw the repair inside the house with the epoxy
grouting. The general issue
was the lack of flashings for all windows and doors.
Where retrofitted the windows could be removed. Mr Booth agreed with Mr Gronow
over the water damage and also said he had taken out a line of tiling to check
on the flashing which was absent. As at 30 December
he did not find evidence of
a waterproof membrane on the balcony and it was of concern that screed in the
balcony might be letting
water into the
crack. He agreed that the severe storm on 22 March 2010 would have an effect
on windows that normally appeared to perform.
In re-examination Mr Gronow said his photographs showed water damage to
carpets adjacent to windows, but while there was a drainage
system where awning
windows occurred, there was nothing at floor level. Mr Booth said that matching
tiles on the balcony would be
impossible after eight years. Mr Gronow confirmed
that the windows would have to be removed to put in flashings. As to water
on the ceiling, Mr Booth said that the end of the secret gutter could be
faulty in not having been turned up. Mr Gronow said he did
not get on the roof
and had no idea where the water was coming from. He assessed that four square
metres of plasterboard soffit was
needed, with which Mr Booth agreed.
George Donald Wellstead
Robert Vincent Haynes
gave evidence on the windows. Mr Haynes spoke to his report at page 292 et seq.
He had inspected the house. The windows
were commercial windows, but did not
have a waterproof rating. They were designed to drain through to a cavity, but
where the tiles
were removed there was no water trap evident. He spoke about the
window ratings and the apparent placing of rubber seals which had
still trapped
water behind them. He did not inspect the windows to the north. The windows on
the bottom floor were not retrofitted
and had the same problems as those above,
as also the doors. Wind pressure blows water inside. To stop the water getting
would need brand new windows. The glass could be salvaged. There was
bubbling on the powder-coating inside. The quote by ASA Glass
does not cover
removal of the windows or damage to the plasterwork. Exhibit C being a drawing
of the front elevation was produced.
Mr Wellstead said he had
inspected the building in June 2010. He had a moisture meter. He produced
Exhibit D being a flashing drawing
and referred to a photo at page
386. He had viewed the building again on 2 July 2011. It was wet. He did not
know about the crack under the door. There was no crack
on the balcony outside.
He referred to the report of Structerre. The membrane was evident to him but it
was not up to the edge of
the windows. The attempts by the Builder to fix the
leaks were not up to a good standard, particularly with the application of
There was a need to renew the membrane over the whole veranda. He
produced Exhibit E as to the updated cost. The tiles are ceramic,
not vinyl. In
cross-examination the witness said they had not tested for water penetration, as
it was what was happening at the sill
which mattered. The French doors did not
have a seal to the centre. With the retrofitted frames it was possible to save
and frames. In re-examination Mr Haynes said the damage to the
powder-coating could not be rectified. Where holes were drilled the
hold the water in and block up the holes. Mr Wellstead said that a long dry
spell could dry out the slab, but this was
not certain. With the membrane his
preference was to use a fibreglass membrane because of the possibility of
cracking. Replacement
was necessary because when taking up a tile the membrane
is damaged. In his quote he had used an hourly rate of $100 plus $10
, a real estate agent, gave evidence of a meeting with the
Inspectors with Mr Princi being present. Mr Princi had stated there was
fibreglass membrane. Mr Princi had pulled up the carpet from the floor and
discovered the crack inside the house.
2.5 Mr A Booth was recalled to provide evidence of the scope of work involved in
repairs as per his November 2009 report. With the
north window there was a need
for there to be a flashing to direct water outside the window, with weepholes at
the bottom to cope
with water collected in the flashing. The balcony slab had to
be protected from leaking water into the interior. Housepect would
supervise the
work which required 14 hours at
$250 an hour which was the
expert’s rate. He had no idea what was wrong with the north
Nigel John Graham
gave evidence of his quote at page 151. He had
inspected the building and removed some bricks to examine the structure. He had
replace the
damp course along the front wall of the balcony
and slot it inside, and then once new doors were inserted, they had to render
walls. If a sill tray was put in with the windows this would reduce his
quote by $1,000 to $1,500. For the time factor 5% needed
to be added to the
quote. He had also inspected the building on 12 August 2010 and inspected it all
the way around to consider where
to drill weepholes. This also required a 5%
increase. That was at page 359 and at page 368 he had quoted for the north
install sill and cavity flashings. He said it was hard to tell what
was needed. This required a 3% increase in price.
In cross-examination he said he had quoted for the north window on what he
had been told. His quote for weepholes was about $100 per
weephole including
scaffolding. He was not charging for the hole to be repaired in the wall. He had
made the hole to examine the
inside cavity and would repair it. There will be at
least one man for two to three weeks – that is 21 days at $450 per day
$9,450. He had no idea whether flashings existed. His rate for giving evidence
was $85 for a half hour attendance plus waiting
Steven Anthony Ripamonti
, employed by Shelley Glass for nine years as
an estimator, referred to his quote of 13 June 2010 at pages 315-318 and also
to pages 319-320 for sizes and descriptions. All included commercial
framing and powder- coating with an N3 rating. The glazing was
to appropriate
standards. The cost of removing the old frames and glass would be an extra
$1,850. Scaffolding may be required. With
retrofit windows he would not need
scaffolding. Referring to page 311, the glass mentioned there is more expensive.
The security
film on their quote would give a better performance. He had no
technical knowledge about the use of silicon.
cross-examination he said he had not been to site, but one of their supervisors
attended and did a basic measure. However, for
fabrication they would have to do
a thorough measure and quote. For the majority of Perth a rating of N2 or N3
applied to the coastal
regions. He agreed it might be possible to save the
glass. In answer to the Tribunal he said they used a sill tray or a sub-sill
a normal method.
2.8 Mr Reay produced a number of photographs as Exhibit F
Craig Deacon
was not available to give evidence as to his quote, but
the cost and an average of 5% increase was not disputed by the
2.10 The Owners accepted that they would attend to three items of their list of
costs themselves, i.e. tiling, shower recess and
lintels, and the Builder would
not be responsible for these costs.
3. EVIDENCE OF BUILDER
Done Kolichev
advised he ran Stirling Glass
and Aluminium and had 30 years’ experience. He was familiar with the
property. He referred to
his quote to Mr Princi at page 238. The windows and
doors were commonly used and had an N3 rating which fitted in with that area.
referred to various tests at pages 186, 228 and 230, and the company had
installed the doors and windows. All windows on the ground
retrofitted while on the top floor they were bricked in. He was aware of
several problems of leaking. The quote at page
242 of ASA was referred to. He
was not aware of why sill trays were required for retrofitted windows. Where
they were bricked in,
a flashing fin was added. It was a brick-in fin. Sill
trays can be added but one needed to snap off the fin or bend it. The sill
would cost around $500 per window. Technically it is not necessary to take out
any windows or doors. He was referred to the
quote of Shelley Glass at page 315.
He confirmed points 1, 2 and 3 and as to 4 that flyscreens can go back in. It
was noted under
point 9 that removal apparently did not include taking the
previous fittings from site. A reasonable price would be $20,000 plus
contrasting the quote of ASA at page 311 with that of Shelley Glass at page 315
he noted there were significant differences
which were explained, but they were
waterproof. He did not agree that the existing design
could not be made more waterproof. Residential awnings were compatible with
400 series frame. If there were any problems, seals of neoprene rubber could be
installed. However when the frame was made the
seals are put on. They cost $300
per window. All awning windows would cost $400 to reseal. The powder-coat finish
was perfectly okay
when he visited the site in 2009. In a coastal environment,
it would last two to three years and then would need repair.
In cross-examination he said he was familiar with Quinns Rocks. He had not
seen whether the Builder had put in any flashing downstairs.
He had personally
brought those frames to site for retrofitting. He acknowledged that there had
been several visits to site by his
firm to deal with problems of leaking, but he
did not know if it included the entire west elevation. They did not know where
water was coming from. He could not recall saying he would not go there when
it was raining.
In re-examination he said he was present at a meeting in 2006 and 2009 on
site. Silicon can be removed off frames and glass. Once
they knew where the
water was coming in, then they could fix it, but it did not need the replacement
of all doors and windows.
3.2 The Builder said in relation to the evidence that he:
the quote of $100 per weephole.
Owners had not led any evidence of the costs of inside painting but accepted the
quotation at page 347 subject to one or two exceptions.
The update of costs in
Exhibit H was noted.
was a quote to repair the en-suite cornice at page 365.
questioned the need to repaint walls of the en-suite merely because of replacing
the cornice.
south facing wall with the hole in it had been accepted by the tuck-pointer as
his responsibility to repair and the painting was
therefore his responsibility
and not the Builder’s.
was found that the doors and windows had to be replaced the Builder would leave
to that Tribunal, but it was considered that
$15,000 was a reasonable cost.
the quote at page 151 of waterproofing the area next to the doors and the
balcony, it was felt a price of $45 per square metre
was applicable.
cost at page 368 for the north window was not
4. TRIBUNAL VISIT TO SITE
The Tribunal then visited the site and the hearing
was reconvened for any final statements. At the conclusion by agreement the
Complainants
by their Counsel within 21 days, were to provide details of all
costs they claimed for witness fees and the Respondent would have
a further 7
days to register any objections.
5. CONSIDERATION OF EVIDENCE
5.1 It is emphasised that at all times the Respondent
has not disputed liability. It is only the extent of that liability and the
actual costs accruing therefrom that is disputed. Accordingly the Tribunal found
as follows, in assessing the claims as set out in
the letter of Vogt Graham
dated 25 February 2011 at page 370 of our files. The Owners sought an Order to
5.2 The claims are:
5.2.1 Claim 2(a)(i) Leaking windows in the games room and dining room, plus
2(a)(ii) Water leaking through balcony slab, plus 2(b)(i)
Water leaking through
lounge room wall, plus 2(d)(i) Leaking doors and windows. All of these sections
dealt with the one issue of
leaking conditions and all were evident from the
evidence and site visit, and accepted by the Builder. No specific evidence as to
the costs quoted was given by the Builder and so the quotations were accepted
and the following assessment made to repair the damage:
We took the quote of ASA Windows Pty Ltd at page 311 of our papers as the
basic price to replace windows and doors including GST.
The submission by the
Builder of $15,000 for said work had not been proved.
The above quote was for supply and fixing into prepared
openings, so the cost of initial preparation had to be
considered. At page 322 was the quote of Federation
Tuckpointing of WA Pty Ltd. However the installation of sill
tray flashings was already included in (1) above. Mr Graham
in evidence said these came to about $1,500 which meant a
deduction of $1,650 with GST, so that the cost would be
$8,650 minus $1,650.
Waterproofing of the front of the balcony slab with membrane
and making good, which was not in the quotation at No. 1.
There was no quote for this specific aspect so it was assessed at 15m
Painting of the finished surfaces was taken from the quote of
Mindarie Painting at page 347. The items were No. 1 - $700,
plus 2 = $250, plus 7 = $300, makes a total of $1,250.
The cost of a bin had already been included in the quote of
ASA Windows
Curtains and blinds – the quotation of Yanchep Carpets and
Blinds at page 323 was accepted as a reasonable figure in
our estimate.
The cost of skirting of Timbajaxx at page 324 was also
accepted as a reasonable figure.
For the costs of tiles to cover the membrane adjacent to the
doors on the balcony, the assessment was taken from the prices at page 343
as $750 for 15m
plus labour @ 15m
$50/metre = $1,125.
Replacement of the screeding was assessed at $40/m
These items covered the cost of stemming the leaks at the front of the
5.2.2 Other claims still in issue were:
Claim c(ii) – Lack of weepholes around the structure. The claim at
page 359 for 26 holes plus 5% increase in price since the
Claim c(iii) – There was some confusion over the ceiling referred to
here. This item was taken to refer to the leaking from
the upper floor balcony
with the ceiling below. No quote had been given for this but we took the
equivalent figure of Mindarie Painting
at Item No. 6.
Claim c(iv) – Damaged cornice in en-suite bathroom. The repair cost
is at page 365 for $290. At page 347 Mindarie Painting quoted
$200 to paint the
cornice and $200 to paint the north and east walls in the en-suite (total
Claim d(i) – See Item No.1 of these assessments.
Claim d(ii) – North side of house leak – no evidence was led as
to how this had occurred. At best it was speculation,
however, upon inspection
the Tribunal noted that there was a large concentration of water coming off the
roof at one point and discharging
onto a small area of tiles below. The Builder
accepted that a spreader should have been installed and accepted a cost of
Claim d(iii) – Water damage from an apparent leak in the roof valley
above the upper balcony and which had caused damage to
the ceiling above the
balcony. The quote to repair is at page 274 and is $200. Painting is Item No. 6
of Mindarie Painting at page
347 of $450. The total is therefore $650.
total for all remedial work is therefore
However a claim has been made for supervision. Evidence was given by Mr
Booth as to the statement at page 364 that 14 hours at $250/hour
was required or
a total or $3,500. We are prepared to accept this figure given that some of the
work was technical in scope and that
a number of different trades would be
The total for all items that were accepted and not withdrawn is
6.1 In so far as the claim relating to the costs of
renovating the waterproofing of the house is concerned, there will be an order
that “In accordance with Section 12A (1A) of the Builders’
Registration Act
, the Builder is to pay the Owners the sum of $53,460 within
three weeks of the date of this Order”.
6.2 As to other costs incurred, the parties agreed at the conclusion of the
hearing to the Owners sending to the Tribunal the details
of costs of the
witnesses called at the hearing which they claimed. This is a standard procedure
of this Tribunal, but the lawyers
for the Owners then had a change of mind and
decided to follow the Supreme Court practice and wait for the decision first and
claim for costs according to the
decision. There is nothing
in either the Builders’
Registration Act
or the Home Building
to say that procedures of other Courts apply to the Tribunal. Section 36
(1) and (5) apply as also Section 38 (3) of the Builders’
Registration
. Accordingly a letter was sent to the legal firm giving them ten days to
produce the claims of witness costs. This matter has been
drawing on for an
excessive amount of time. The Builder has at all times admitted liability and
there is no reason at all to delay
matters further. Accordingly the Order to Pay
for the expenses for the building work will be issued now and at the expiration
the ten-day period a further order will be made relevant to the costs of
MR D A FORRESTER
Deputy Chairperson
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (846 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
PDF format (46.1 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter