URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WAIRC/2025/150.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:04:21
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
The Independent Education Union of Western Australia, Union of Employees -v- The Moerlina School Inc. [2025] WAIRC 150; (7 March 2025)
MOERLINA SCHOOL (ENTERPRISE
BARGAINING) AGREEMENT 2024
WESTERN AUSTRALIAN INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COMMISSION
COMMISSIONER C TSANG
ON THE PAPERS
DELIVERED :
7 MARCH 2025
AG 28 OF 2024
THE INDEPENDENT EDUCATION UNION OF
WESTERN AUSTRALIA, UNION OF EMPLOYEES
THE MOERLINA SCHOOL INC.
Law (WA) – Whether the Commission has jurisdiction over the application to
register the Moerlina School (Enterprise
Bargaining) Agreement 2024 –
Whether the respondent is a trading corporation – Respondent found to be a
trading corporation
Legislation
Industrial Relations Act 1979(WA)
Fair Work Act 2009
Application
Representation:
Mr M Elliott
Mr E Callow
Cases referred to in reasons:
E v Australian Red Cross Society
[1991] FCA 20
EDUCANG Ltd v Queensland Industrial Relations Commission
Quickenden v Commissioner O’Connor of the Australian Industrial
Relations Commission
[2001] FCA 303
R v Federal Court of Australia; ex parte WA National Football League
(1979) 143 CLR 190
Reasons for Decision
4 October 2024, the applicant filed an application to register the
School (Enterprise Bargaining) Agreement 2024
Application
Fair Work Act 2009
) defines a
national system employer as ‘a constitutional corporation, so far as it
employs, or usually employs, an individual’.
26(1) of the
states that the
applies to the
exclusion of all State or Territory industrial laws
national system employees and national system employers.
26(2) and (3) of the
define a State or Territory industrial law to
include the
Industrial Relations Act 1979
outlines exclusions to the application of s 26 of the
, which does not include the registration of industrial
agreements.
defines a constitutional corporation as a corporation to
which paragraph 51(xx) of the
Constitution
applies, which relevantly refers
to a trading corporation formed within the limits of the Commonwealth.
Consequently,
as the respondent is a corporation, the Commission can only hear and determine
the Application
if the respondent is not a trading
corporation.
The parties’ contentions
parties contend that the respondent is not a trading corporation.
17 February 2025, the treasurer of the respondent’s School Council filed
an affidavit attaching the following:
(a) The respondent’s
Constitution as updated on 25 May 2021.
(b) The audited financial report for the respondent for the year ending 31
December 2023.
(c) A document prepared by the treasurer ‘explaining the operations of
the school in the context of the above attached documents’.
(d) The 2023 and 2024 Notices of Determination from the federal government
identifying the calculation of federal funding for 2023
26 February 2025, the applicant filed submissions, stating: [footnotes
R v Federal Court of Australia; ex parte WA National Football
143 CLR 190
majority of the High Court determined that the appropriate test for determining
whether an entity was a trading corporation
was not to consider the
corporation’s objects, but to observe whether its current activities
amounted to trading activity.
in his opinion, Mason J considered trading activity as it related to
Not every corporation that is involved in
trading is a trading corporation. The trading activity of a corporation may be
and so incidental to some other principal activity, viz religion or
education in the case of a church or school, that it could not
be described as a
trading corporation. Whether the trading activities of a particular corporation
are sufficient to warrant being
characterised as a trading corporation is very
much a question of fact and degree.
Consequentially,
not every corporation that engages in trading activity is a trading corporation.
However, a corporation will be considered
a trading corporation “when its
trading activities form a sufficiently significant proportion of its overall
activities.”
constitutes a
sufficiently significant proportion
of trading activity
depends [on] “fact and degree...” Trading activity constituting a
small percentage of a corporation’s
overall activity can be found to be a
sufficiently significant proportion if the monetary amount itself is substantial
E v Australian Red Cross Society
[[1991] FCA 20]
”), the Federal Court of Australia found
that the respondent was a constitutional corporation on the basis that even
only 4.4% of its income was through trading activity, this figure
amounted to some $2 million (in 1984 reckoning).
Wilcox J also opined that public welfare activity for which an organisation
receives government funding to deliver could
not constitute trading activity,
noting that the Respondent “
engage(s) in a major public welfare
activity pursuant to agreements with the Commonwealth and the various State
governments under
which they will be reimbursed most of their
receipt of government funding by a non-profit organisation for the purpose of
providing a public benefit cannot constitute trading
activity. However, fees
charged in exchange for services was considered to constitute trading
Applicant concedes that there is some precedent – albeit at an inferior
court level – for finding that a non-government
school is a trading
corporation. In
EDUCANG Ltd v
Queensland Industrial
Relations Commission
] [2006] QIC [43]
President Hall found that
despite receiving significant state and federal government funding for provision
of its services as a Christian
school, the percentage and monetary volume of
trading activity (including tuition fees and other activities) constituted a
sufficiently
significant proportion of trading activity.
THE RESPONDENT’S ACTIVITIES ARE TRADING ACTIVITIES?
considering which of the Respondent’s activities constitute trading
activity, the Applicant has regard to the affidavit of
Edward Minchin Callow,
sworn on 11 February 2025 (“
Callow Affidavit
”). Mr Callow is
the Treasurer of the Respondent’s School Council. The contents of the
Callow Affidavit are not contested
by the Applicant.
Objects of the Association stipulated in the Respondent’s Constitution do
not indicate any trading activity, stating that
the objects
(a) to operate a school called Moerlina School;
(b) to provide an educational environment, in accordance with the
principles and beliefs of Moerlina School, which is safe, nurturing
stimulating, supports all students in striving for excellence according to their
individual potential, and promotes a culture
of self-motivated, resilient,
creative and inspired learners;
(c) to maintain and promote a high standard of education;
(d) to comply with all relevant legislation;
(e) to maintain an engaged school community; and
(f) to participate in the wider community.
Objects also state that “
The property and income of the Association
shall be applied solely towards the promotion of the objects of the
Association
Applicant accepts that given the test set out in
Respondent’s Objects should not take precedence over a consideration of
its current activities in determining trading
status. However,
the Respondent’s Objects are not without relevance, especially given
Mason J’s consideration of fact
and degree.
Respondent’s financial reports for the 2023 calendar year indicate that
the Respondent’s total receipts from operating
activities for [2022] and
2023 amounted to:
from Fees: $773,356 $833,831
Receipts from Grants: $717,961 $646,077
Receipts from Other Income: $187,838 $152,900
Respondent explains that the Receipts from Fees is tuition fees levied by the
Respondent to meet the cost of educating students
which is not met by government
grants or other income. The percentage of tuition fees’ overall
contribution to the Respondent’s
annual income has declined from the 2022
calendar year.
from Grants is indicative of State and Commonwealth Government grants that the
Respondent receives for its role in providing
primary education as a registered
non-government school. The percentage of government grants’ overall
contribution to the Respondent’s
annual income has increased year on year
from the 2022 calendar year.
whilst the Respondent does derive some income from other sources –
including fee for service tutoring and rental agreements
– this income is
of a negligible amount compared to the other two categories of income. Further,
it does not engage in the
non-government schools engage in. For example, the Respondent does not operate a
canteen or uniform shop.
Applicant concedes that on the basis of the information provided in the Callow
Affidavit, a majority of the Respondent’s
income is not from non-trading
activity. However, the financial value of the income associated with trading
activity is small, being
some $976,269 for the 2024 calendar year. It is
certainly smaller than the approximately $2,000,000 figure (circa 1984)
contemplated
by the Federal Court in
, and smaller
than the $12,680,532 value (circa 2006) of trading activity considered in
regard for the fact and degree of the Respondent’s circumstances,
(a) its objects not pertaining to trading activity;
(b) the extent of the Respondent’s income deriving from non-trading
activity; and
(c) the minimal value of the trading activity compared to like cases,
the Applicant submits that it is open to the Commission to determine that the
Respondent’s trading activity is not of a sufficiently
significant
proportion to be considered a trading corporation.
Consideration
applicant relies on the following cases:
is a 1979 decision of the High Court of Australia, in which the majority
(Barwick CJ, Mason J with Jacobs J agreeing, and Murphy
J) found the Western
Australian National Football League (
State League
) and the West Perth
) to be trading corporations.
, Barwick CJ said (208), (209), (211):
of the firm conviction that for constitutional purposes a corporation formed
within the limits of Australia will satisfy
the description “trading
corporation” if trading is a substantial corporate activity.
Its activities rather than the
purpose of its incorporation will designate
its relevant character. But so to say assumes that such trading activities are
its corporate powers, actual or imputed. It is the corporation which
satisfies the description which is the subject matter of the
power. Thus its
corporate capacity or incapacity cannot be ignored. But once it is found that
trading is a substantial and not a
merely peripheral activity not forbidden by
the organic rules of the corporation, the conclusion that the corporation is a
corporation is open.
I now consider what the Club and the State League were in fact engaged in
doing. Trade for constitutional purposes cannot be confined
to dealing in goods
or commodities. Its full parameters may be difficult of definition. But the
commercial nature of an activity
is an element in deciding whether the action is
in trade or trading.
In my opinion, the presentation of a football match as a commercial venture
for profit to the promoting body is an activity of trade.
I agree with Lord
Russell in thinking that the presentation of a play by a theatrical promoter for
reward by admission fees is a
matter of trade: see
(1924) 1 Ch 302
)]. I can see little
difference between the presentation of a theatrical spectacle and the
presentation for reward of the spectacle
of a football match played by
professionals as a major source of their income and of the income of the
, Mason J with Jacobs J agreeing, said
(233–‍234): [emphasis added]
For my part, I prefer the
minority view as expressed in [
St George County Council
particular the remarks of Barwick CJ [(542–‍543)], when his
Honour said that to fall within
it is not necessary that a corporation
be formed for trading or financial purposes and that “the activities of a
corporation
at the time a law of the Parliament is said to operate upon it will
determine whether or not it satisfies the statutory and therefore
constitutional description”.
“Trading corporation” is not and never has been a term of art or
one having a special legal meaning. Nor, as the Chief
Justice pointed out,
was there a generally accepted definition of the expression in the nineteenth
century. Essentially it is a description
or label given to a corporation when
its trading activities form a sufficiently significant proportion of its overall
as to merit its description as a trading corporation.
Even if, and this has not been established, the description was somewhat less
liberally applied circa 1900 than it is today, this
Court should, in applying
the expression, give effect to the content which it is recognized as having at
this time. The expression
was no doubt used in the contemplation that the power
would extend to such corporations as should from time to time be described
trading corporations and in accordance with the principle that words in the
Constitution
are not restricted to the denotations which they had in 1900. In
Lansell v Lansell
[1964] HCA 42
(1964) 110 CLR 353
[(366)] Taylor J said
“... although the meaning of these terms does not change, their denotation
must extend as new concepts
develop”. The distinction between meaning and
denotation is not without its difficulties. However, for present purposes they
need not be pursued. Suffice it to say that, even if the expression was rather
less extensively applied at the turn of the century,
it nevertheless denoted a
corporation which was engaged in trading activities in the sense already
Not every corporation which is engaged in trading activity is a trading
corporation.
The trading activity of a corporation may be so slight and so
incidental to some other principal activity, viz. religion or education
case of a church or school, that it could not be described as a trading
corporation.
Whether the trading activities of a particular corporation are
sufficient to warrant its being characterized as a trading corporation
much a question of fact and degree.
, Murphy J said (239–‍240): [emphasis
The constitutional description of trading corporations
includes those bodies incorporated for the purpose of trading; and also those
corporations which trade. A corporation which trades is a trading corporation
even if it gained incorporation under an Act which
forbids trading. The
suggestion that such a corporation ceases to be one when engaged in the
forbidden activity resembles the submission
which was rejected by Fullagar J in
Williams v Hursey
[1959] HCA 51
(1959) 103 CLR 30
where he stated that the
notion of qualified legal personality is unintelligible.
Trading is a term of very wide scope (see
Bank of New South Wales v The
Commonwealth
[1948] HCA 7
(1948) 76 CLR 1
[(381) (Dixon CJ)];
Association of Local Government Officers v Bolton Corporation
[(184–‍185) (Lord Wright)].
Even though trading is not the major part of its activities, the description,
“trading corporation” does not mean a corporation
which trades and
does nothing else or in which trading is the dominant activity. A trading
corporation may also be a sporting, religious,
or governmental body. As long as
the trading is not insubstantial, the fact that trading is incidental to other
activities does not
prevent it being a trading corporation. For example, a very
large corporation may engage in trading which though incidental to its
non-trading activities, and small in relation to those, is nevertheless
substantial and perhaps exceeds or is of the same order in
amount as the trading
of a person who clearly is a trader. Such a corporation is a trading corporation
and is the subject of the
legislative power in
That power is subject
Constitution
and may be limited by other provisions, for example,
would protect a religious body which was a trading corporation from laws which
would prohibit the free exercise of religion. The
corporations power may be used
not only to protect persons who trade with trading corporations, but also to
protect trading corporations
in regard to those who deal with them.
It follows that in my view [
St George County Council
wrongly decided and should be overruled.
The question is not whether the prosecutors and the SA League are sporting
clubs (no doubt, they are), but whether any of them is
corporation. A few centuries ago trade was mostly centred around primary
industry, a generation or so ago mostly around
secondary industry; now it is
overwhelmingly centred around tertiary industry.
Most Australian workers now
work in areas of entertainment, information, education, health, tourism,
leisure, sport, transport and
similar services. Many activities which once would
not have been regarded as trade have come to be recognized as trade (see
Walker v Crystal Palace Football Club Ltd
[1909] UKLawRpKQB 187
(1910) 1 KB 87
. The commercialization of sport, education,
religion, medicine and other social or professional activities is a world-wide
phenomenon.
The prosecutor, [the State League] and the SA League are engaged
in very substantial trading, in charging for admission, putting
spectacles for profit, selling television rights and selling goods; the [Club]
is a trader on a smaller scale. All three
are trading corporations.
is a 1991 decision of the Federal Court of Australia, in which
Wilcox J found the Australian Red Cross Society (
) and The Royal
Prince Alfred Hospital (
) to be trading corporations.
[118]–‍[121], Wilcox J refers to
the next occasion that the High Court had to consider the meaning of
“trading corporation”, a different result ensued.
That was in
]. That case arose under the 1974 Act, the question being
whether certain corporations concerned with Australian League football were
“trading corporations”. By majority, the Court held that they
were. The test favoured by Barwick CJ and Stephen J in
St George County
, the activities of the corporation, was adopted by all except
Gibbs J; although Stephen J, with whom Aickin J agreed, differed with
majority as to the application of that test to the facts of the case.
the majority, Barwick CJ [(208)] pointed out that, under modern conditions,
“the nature of a company may not be discernible
from a perusal of its
memorandum”. He went on:
The only sure guide to the
nature of the company is a purview of its current activities, a judgment as to
its nature being made after
an overview of all those activities. I remain of the
firm conviction that for constitutional purposes a corporation formed within
limits of Australia will satisfy the description ‘trading
corporation’ if trading is a substantial corporate activity.
activities rather than the purpose of its incorporation will designate its
relevant character. But so to say assumes that such
trading activities are
within its corporate powers, actual or imputed. It is the corporation which
satisfies the description which
is the subject matter of the power. Thus its
corporate capacity or incapacity cannot be ignored. But once it is found that
is a substantial and not a merely peripheral activity not forbidden by
the organic rules of the corporation, the conclusion that
the corporation is a
trading corporation is open.
J, with whom Jacobs J agreed, expressed agreement [(233)], with the minority
approach in
St George County Council
. He said that
“trading corporation” is “a description or label given to a
corporation when its trading activities
form a sufficiently significant
proportion of its overall activities as to merit its description as a trading
corporation”.
Murphy J went a little further, saying
A trading corporation may also be a sporting, religious, or
governmental body. As long as the trading is not insubstantial, the fact
trading is incidental to other activities does not prevent it being a trading
corporation. For example, a very large corporation
may engage in trading which
though incidental to its non-trading activities, and small in relation to those,
is nevertheless substantial
and perhaps exceeds or is of the same order in
amount as the trading of a person who clearly is a trader.
was referred to in two cases decided in 1982. In the first,
Announcers Equity Association of Australia v Fontana Films Proprietary
(1982) 150 CLR 169
, Brennan J [(221)] referred with approval to
the test adopted by Mason J in
. In the other,
Superannuation Board v Trade Practices Commission
[1982] HCA 72
(1982) 150 CLR 282
[(303–‍304)], Mason, Murphy and Deane JJ applied the
approach to the determination of what constituted a
“financial corporation”. After quoting the tests adopted by
of Barwick CJ, Mason and Murphy JJ in Adamson, their Honours
The point is that the corporation engages in trading
activities and these activities do not cease to be trading activities because
they are entered into in the course of, or for the purpose of, carrying on a
primary or dominant undertaking not described by reference
to trade. As the
carrying on of that undertaking requires or involves engagement in trading
activities, there is no difficulty in
categorizing the corporation as a trading
corporation when it engages in the activities.
the principles in
to the Society, Wilcox J said (
[123]–‍[125]): [emphasis added]
is convenient to deal immediately with a submission made on behalf of the
applicant that, in applying these principles to the first
respondents, account should be taken of their blood supply activities. The
applicant accepts that neither respondent makes
any charge for the blood which
it supplies. Neither “trades” in blood, in the usual sense of that
term. But, say counsel,
the reality is that the blood transfusion activities of
the respondents constitute substantial businesses by which they supply valuable
commodities, blood and blood products, in return for large payments. In the year
1984-1985, the Society (including its Divisions)
received from Governments a
total of $44,965,328 in respect of its blood transfusion services. Of this, the
NSW Division directly
received more than $10,000,000. (The exact figure is not
ascertainable from the Division’s annual report). These were, of course,
substantial sums. They were earned only because the respondents are prepared to
carry on blood transfusion services at a scale, in
terms of labour and
resources, greater than that of many organisations which are undoubtedly
“trading corporations”.
But I do not think that it is appropriate
to describe the gratuitous provision of a public welfare service, substantially
at government
expense, as the conduct of a “trade”. It is pertinent
to recall the words of Stephen J in
St George County Council
is the acts of buying and selling that are at the very heart of trade”,
and also to remember the distinction he
made in respect of the distribution of
electricity free of charge. In relation to the supply of blood, it seems to me
that the first
and second respondents do not engage in trading activities.
They engage in a major public welfare activity pursuant to agreements
Commonwealth and the various State governments under which they will be
reimbursed most of their costs
leaving out of account the blood transfusion income, the first and second
respondents each earn considerable sums of money from
the sale of goods. It is
not easy to ascertain the precise figures from the annual reports. But, as I
have said, in 1984-1985 the
Society earned over $2,000,000 in this way.
to the evidence of Mr John Smith, the Executive Director of the NSW Division, in
1984-1985 the Division received $1,193,024
from “donations from Branches
which operate opportunity shops, street stalls and other fund raising
activities”, $65,121
for charges made for attendance at its first aid
courses and a further $307,082 from its Clarence Street gift shop. Perhaps not
the money received from Branches emanated from trading activities but
trading was plainly a major contributant to the Division’s
scale of the Division’s trading activities amply meets any of the tests
enunciated in
. It is true that the trading activities
were not motivated by the hope of private gain but purely to earn the revenue
which the Division
needed for its charitable activities. But, as Mason, Murphy
and Deane JJ made clear in
State Superannuation Board
does not matter.
assessing whether the Hospital engaged in trading activities, Wilcox J said
[131]–‍[133]): [emphasis added]
seems to me that the critical question is the nature of [the Hospital’s]
activities at the relevant time. Accepting that
its predominant activity was the
provision of medical and surgical care to patients,
they were not objectives
antithetical to the notion of trade. Many trading corporations supply services
rather than goods. Many privately
owned hospitals provide medical and
surgical care for reward with the purpose of thereby trading profitably.
There was nothing in
the intrinsic nature of [the Hospital’s]
activities to disqualify it as a trading corporation
the question be asked whether the scale of the corporation’s trading
activities was
“substantial”, “a sufficiently
significant proportion of its overall activities” or “not
insubstantial”
– to apply the tests adopted in
– it is relevant to note that, in the financial year ended 30 June
1985 it received $14,584,456 in patients’ fees in return
for services
rendered by it. It also received $3,736,662 from “business
activities”. It is true that these amounts were
dwarfed by its State
government subsidy of $112,127,706. But that does not matter. Trading activities
yielding some $18 million per
year can only be described as substantial. It
seems to me that the scale of the hospital’s trading activities in
was such that it should be regarded as then being a trading
corporation.
should add that the evidence of Mr K R Barker, the Executive Director –
Finance and Administration of the New South Wales
Department of Health disclosed
that charges made to non-public patients at public hospitals are fixed by
the Minister by reference
to the allowable health insurance rebate under
Commonwealth legislation. Mr Barker said that “at no time has the daily
accommodation
fee exceeded or approximated the actual cost of delivery of those
services for each day”. Basing himself upon this evidence,
counsel for the
New South Wales Attorney General submits that it follows that the hospital is
not engaged in trading activities in
servicing private patients, so that the
corporation conducting the hospital cannot be regarded as a trading corporation.
course, this does not follow; the corporation might qualify as a trading
corporation because of its other activities.
In any event, as Stephen J made
St George County Council
, it is not necessary that trading
activities be profitable, or even intended to be profitable, to constitute the
trader a “trading
corporation”
is a 2006 decision of the Industrial Court of Queensland, in which President
Hall found EDUCANG Ltd to be a trading corporation.
Ltd’s operating income for the year ending 31 December 2005
Percentage of Total
Tuition and other fees
8,175,510.00
Full fee paying international student fees
2,028,198.00
Overseas study groups
State recurrent grants
2,823,080.00
Commonwealth recurrent grants
7,077,407.00
Other miscellaneous grants
Other income
Trading accounts income
analysis of the figures at [
indicates that of EDUCANG Ltd’s operating income:
(a) 44% was
derived from State, Commonwealth and other miscellaneous grants;
(b) 45% was derived from tuition and student fees; and
(c) 11% was derived from other income.
, the court said the following in relation to
Quickenden v Commissioner O’Connor of
the Australian Industrial Relations Commission
[2001] FCA 303
): [emphasis added]
The decision in
], may be shortly disposed of. For present purposes, the
decision should be regarded as an authority upon which an argument may be
that the very large sums received by EDUCANG Ltd from government sources in the
return for the provision of educational services
to students which might have
otherwise been an impost upon the government are, like the sums of money
provided to the [Society] in
return for the welfare service of distributing
blood and blood products, to be disregarded in determining whether or not
Ltd is a trading corporation. Counsel for EDUCANG Ltd has,
of course, consistently argued that EDUCANG Ltd is to be treated as a
trading corporation even if those sums are to be wholly left out of account.
The decision of the Full Court in [
] is (perhaps) of
greater assistance. The issue of present relevance was whether the University of
Western Australia was a “trading
corporation” within the meaning of
Constitution
. In the result the majority, Black CJ and
French J, put aside the University’s argument that the sums of money
received pursuant
Higher Education Funding Act 1988
(Cwth) were to
be taken into account in evaluating whether or not the University was a
“trading corporation”. Under the
legislative scheme established by
Higher Education Funding Act 1988
(Cwth) a statutory obligation was
imposed on each tertiary institution to require payment from students, a
liability was then created
for the contribution owed by the student to the
tertiary institution, and (finally) provision was made for the Commonwealth to
the requisite amount to the student to discharge that liability and to pay
the sum loaned directly to the tertiary institution. It
was understandable that
the University, which contended that it was indeed a trading corporation, wished
to take those fees into
account. In 1995 fees paid directly by students to the
University amounted to $8,849,000 whilst fees paid by the Commonwealth pursuant
to the loan scheme amounted to $17,318,000. In the result, because of the nature
of the quite original legislative scheme, the majority
held that the revenue so
derived was not revenue from trading. This Court is not concerned with any such
legislative scheme. This
Court is concerned simply with the levying of fees
pursuant to powers within the
Constitution
of EDUCANG Ltd so as to provide
EDUCANG Ltd with sources of revenue to enable it to discharge its immediate
purpose of providing
co-educational education services: compare the language of
the trial judge (Lee J) in [
(607–‍608)].
Where the decision of the Full Court is of assistance is in its application of
the High Court authorities
(previously quoted) to the activities of the
University. The Full Court found incidental activities that “are a
substantial,
in the sense of non-trivial, element, albeit not the predominant
element of what the university does”, did amount trading activities.
activities looked at were the University’s investment activities,
including the buying, selling and renting of property,
from which it derived
$44,393,000 in 1995 and $48,048,000 in 1996 (16.83% and 16.97% of total
operating revenues for the two years
respectively). Other business activities
relied upon were the Festival of Perth (intentionally not carried on for
profit), the sale
of publications, parking, provision of student accommodation,
and provision of computer services through Winthrop technology. Here,
course, the percentage of total revenue derived from government grants is very
much less than the percentage derived from trading
activities.
So high is the percentage of operating revenue derived from trading
activities, and so large are the sums involved, that this Court
could not resist
the conclusion that EDUCANG Ltd is a trading corporation without failing to
discharge its duty to accept and follow
decisions of the High Court of
. Further if one were to take a global view of the purpose and
activities of EDUCANG Ltd, the Company is acting to fulfil its immediate
purpose. Even if only the purpose of the Company is considered, the activities
confirm that the immediate purpose gleaned from the
documents is the immediate
purpose and not mere words.
determining factor is whether the respondent’s trading activities are
substantial in amount or constitute a sufficiently
significant proportion of the
corporation’s overall activities.
[123]–[125], the court deemed revenue of
approximately $2,000,000 from the sale of goods, as a proportion of total
revenue from
government grants of $44,965,328 for blood transfusion services, to
be both substantial by amount and sufficiently significant by
(approximately 4.3%) of the Society’s overall activities: ‘The scale
of the Division’s trading activities
amply meets
of the tests
enunciated in
[132], the court considered the Hospital’s trading
activities, which included both the fees charged to patients for services
rendered by it and revenue from business activities. Combined, this amounted to
approximately $18 million, which the court said,
‘can only be described as
substantial’ and of a ‘scale of the hospital’s trading
activities’ such that
the Hospital should be considered a
trading corporation. The following analysis indicates the amounts the
Hospital received in state
government grants and from trading
activities:
112,127,706
Trading activity – fees
Trading activity – business activities
130,448,824
is the commercial nature of an activity that is determinative of whether the
activity is a trading activity:
(209) (Barwick
Murphy J said in
‍ (239–‍240), as long as
the trading is not insubstantial, a trading corporation may be a
sporting, religious, or
governmental body. Indeed, ‘many activities
which once would not have been regarded as trade have come to be recognized as
trade’; specifically the ‘commercialization of sport, education,
religion, medicine and other social or professional
activities’.
[123], an activity would likely only be excluded as a
trading activity if it was the ‘gratuitous provision of a public welfare
service, substantially at government expense’, such as the distribution of
electricity ‘free of charge’.
detailed in the applicant’s submissions [18], the primary purpose of the
respondent is to operate a school (respondent’s
Constitution: cl 3.1(a)).
While the applicant argues that cl 3.1 of the respondent’s Constitution,
which outlines the respondent’s
objects, does not indicate any trading
activity; it is equally true that the objects do not forbid the respondent
engaging in trading
activity. Thus, ‘the conclusion that
the corporation is a trading corporation is open’:
(208) (Barwick CJ).
cl 4 of the respondent’s Constitution, which outlines the powers of the
respondent, explicitly permits the respondent
to engage in activities that
are commonly understood as trading:
of the Association
The Association may do all things
necessary or convenient for carrying out its objects and purposes, and in
particular may:
(a) acquire, hold, deal with, and dispose of any real or personal property
related to the School,
(b) open and operate bank accounts in the name of the Association;
(c) invest, borrow and deal with the funds of the Association;
(d) enter into contracts in the name of the Association;
(e) purchase or take a lease or licence of premises for student
facilities;
(f) construct buildings or structures for the benefit of the School;
(g) employ, discipline and dismiss staff of the School;
(h) set tuition and other fees payable by users of the School services and
facilities; and
(i) act as a trustee and accept and hold real and personal property upon
trust, but does not have power to do any act or thing as
a trustee that, if done
otherwise than as a trustee, would contravene the Act or the rules of the
Association.
theatrical promoter charging an admission fee for the presentation of a play,
and a promoting body charging an admission fee for
the presentation of a
football match played by professionals, were considered to be the trading
activities of the promoter:
(211) (Barwick CJ). Likewise,
charging patients a fee for admission to the Hospital has been determined to be
the trading activity
of the Hospital:
[131], the Hospital’s primary activity of
providing medical and surgical care to patients was found not to be
contradictory
to the notion of trade. The court stated that many privately owned
hospitals provide medical and surgical care for profit, and that
was nothing in the intrinsic nature of the Hospital’s activities to
disqualify it as a trading corporation.
same can be said for an incorporated school, providing education. Indeed, the
specifically referred to ‘the levying of
fees pursuant to powers within the
Constitution
of EDUCANG Ltd so as to provide
EDUCANG Ltd with sources of revenue to enable it to discharge its immediate
purpose of providing
co-educational education services’.
, the University of Western Australia submitted that the
fees charged by it for courses are fees for services, and therefore, should
characterised as revenue from trading activities:
[50]. The majority did not decide the issue but opined that, while the
concept of ‘trading’ is a broad one, it was doubtful
student fees charged by the University should be considered revenue from trading
activities where the fees were regulated
by legislation: [51] (Black CJ and
It is questionable whether the provision of educational
services within the statutory framework of the
Higher Education Funding
amounts to trading. The Act creates a liability for each student to the
University in respect of each course of study undertaken
in a semester. The
amount is not fixed by the University but rather by the Minister under published
guidelines. The concept of “trading”
is a broad one. It is doubtful,
however, that it extends to the provision of services under a statutory
obligation to fix a fee determined
by law and the liability for which, on the
part of the student, appears to be statutory.
contrast, the respondent’s Constitution explicitly provides for the
respondent setting tuition and other fees: cl 4(h) at
the applicant argues in its submissions [22] that the respondent only levies
tuition fees to cover the costs of educating students
that is unmet by
government grants, the respondent’s motive for setting the fee is
irrelevant:
[125]. Moreover, it is not necessary for a
corporation’s trading activities to be profitable, or even intended to be
profitable,
for it to be considered a trading corporation:
the case of EDUCANG Ltd, the court found that it was a trading corporation in
circumstances where the revenue derived from trading
activities met both tests
, being both of a substantial amount and of a
sufficiently significant proportion of overall activities.
the operating income of EDUCANG Ltd to that of the respondent, reveals that the
proportion of income derived from grants,
student fees, and other income is
EDUCANG Ltd
The Moerlina School Inc.
Actual (2005)
Actual (2023)
light of all the circumstances, I find that the respondent’s fee revenue
and ‘other income’ constitute revenue
from the respondent’s
trading activities.
this trading activity is ‘a substantial and not a merely peripheral
(208) (Barwick CJ); cited in
[119]), I find that the respondent is a trading
corporation.
the preceding reasons, I find that the respondent is a trading corporation.
Accordingly,
the Commission lacks jurisdiction over the Application.
Consequently,
application AG 28 of 2024 will be dismissed.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (206 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter