URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WASTR/2004/45.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:09:04
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Zayre Pty Ltd and The Owners of Perlican Point Apartments - Strata Plan - 10400 [2004] WASTR 45 (1 September 2004)
OFFICE OF THE STRATA TITLES REFEREE
Strata titles Act 1985
ZAYRE PTY LTD and THE OWNERS OF PERLICAN POINT APARTMENTS -
STRATA PLAN - 10400
[2004] WASTR 45
MR R J KRONBERGER (REFEREE)
DELIVERED :
1 SEPTEMBER 2004
FILE NO/S :
ST 63 of 2004
ZAYRE PTY LTD
THE OWNERS OF PERLICAN POINT APARTMENTS - STRATA PLAN - 10400
Catchwords:
Real property - Strata titles - alterations within a
lot - approvals required.
Legislation:
Strata titles Act 1985
Representation:
Applicant : In Person
Respondent : In Person
Solicitors:
Applicant :
Respondent :
Case(s) referred to in decision(s):
Case(s) also cited:
STRATA TITLES REFEREE
MR R J KRONBERGER, REFEREE
DATE OF ORDER :
1 SEPTEMBER 2004
PRINCIPAL ORDER
FILE NUMBER :
ST/2004-000063
STRATA PLAN NUMBER :
ZAYRE PTY LTD
THE OWNERS OF PELICAN POINT APARTMENTS – STRATA PLAN 10400
Catchwords:
Real property – Strata titles – alterations within a lot –
approvals required.
Legislation:
Strata Titles Act 1985
Representation:
Applicant :
Respondent :
Solicitors:
Applicant :
Respondent :
Case(s) referred to in judgment(s):
Cases(s) also cited:
PRINCIPAL ORDER
2 Approval required for alterations within a
3 The Applicant is Zayre Pty Ltd as the proprietor of Lot 1 on Strata Plan
10400 ("the Strata Plan").
Strata Plan and
relevant Act
4 The Strata Plan was registered on 12 May 1982 pursuant to the
Titles Act 1966
("the 1966 Act").
5 In 1985, the 1966 Act was repealed and replaced by the
Strata Titles Act
") which continues to be the relevant Act.
6 In these Reasons, unless otherwise specified, all references to sections and
Schedules are, respectively, references to sections
of and Schedules to the
and all references to Regulations are references to the
Strata Titles
General Regulations 1996
7 The parcel is known as "Pelican Point Apartments". It is situated at 22 The
Avenue, Crawley which, according to the Strata Plan,
is also its address for
serving notices on the Strata Company.
8 The western boundary of the parcel fronts The Avenue, Crawley. The eastern
boundary adjoins a reserve known as "JH Abraham Reserve".
9 The development comprises 2 concrete multi-storey buildings and surrounding
common property.
10 One of the buildings, described by the Applicant as "Block A", being the
building closer to The Avenue frontage, contains Lots
9 to 20. There are 3 lots
on each floor.
11 The second building, closer to the eastern boundary of the parcel and
described by the Applicant as "Block B", contains Lots
1 to 8 inclusive. Lots 1,
2 and 3 are on the ground floor, Lots 4, 5 and 6 are on the first floor and Lots
7 and 8 are on the second
12 When the Strata Plan was registered, the by-laws of the Strata Company were,
pursuant to s 15(2) of the 1966 Act, the "standard"
by-laws contained in the
Schedule to that Act. Notification G445023 noted on the Strata Plan on 11 April
1997, records the repeal
of those by-laws and the adoption by the Strata Company
of the "standard" by-laws in Sch 1 and 2 to the
plus 2 additional
by-laws, one relating to the exclusive use and enjoyment of specified parts of
the common property and the
other relating to
the use of vehicles within the
Lot boundaries
13 Pursuant to
and (2), each lot within the scheme is a cubic
space only, having as its boundaries the upper surface
of the floor, the inner
of the perimeter walls and the under surface of the ceiling of the
respective part of the respective
building in which it is
Unit entitlements
14 The aggregate of the unit entitlements is 200 but the allocations to
individual lots range from 9 to 16.
15 The Applicant has sought an Order in the following
"An Order under
section 103F(2)
Strata Titles Act 1985
declaring that the
strata company be deemed to have given its approval to the application of Zayre
Pty Ltd to effect structural alterations
to lot 1 on strata plan
, to be read with
, contains provisions relating to the
approval required to effect works of a structural kind within a lot.
17 A proprietor who has made an application for approval under
who has not obtained that approval, is entitled, by
, to apply to me
for an order that the approval be deemed to have been given.
18 I am able to make such an order if the Applicant satisfies me that the
approval should have been given, but has been unreasonably
Section 7(5)
sets out the only grounds upon which a valid dissenting vote
may be cast, with a dissenting voter being required to specify which
grounds is relied on to support the dissenting vote.
Section 7(5)
"(a) that the carrying out of the proposal will
breach the plot ratio restrictions or open space requirements for the lot
ascertained
in accordance with
section 7A(3)
(b) in the case of a lot that is not a vacant lot, that the carrying out of
the proposal —
(i) will result in a structure that is visible from outside the lot and that
is not in keeping with the rest of the development;
(ii) may affect the structural soundness of a building; or
(iii) may interfere with any easement created by
(c) any other ground that is prescribed."
21 The only other ground that is "prescribed" is set out in Reg 31 of the
Regulations as follows:
"The fact that the carrying out of a proposal will contravene a specified by-law
or specified by-laws of the strata company, is prescribed
as a ground for the
purposes of
section 7(5)(c)".
Applicant's
submissions
22 The Applicant's Lot 1 is on the ground floor of Block B.
23 The Applicant states that it wishes to make "small-scale structural changes"
within Lot 1. These would involve the removal of
some sections of single brick
and mortar internal walls and their replacement with supporting steel columns
24 No changes are proposed in respect of common property.
25 The Applicant states that the alterations would only be "minimally visible"
from the exterior of Block B and that 2 firms of
structural engineers have
reported that the alterations will not affect the structural soundness of Block
26 As not all lot proprietors were prepared to give their approval to the
proposed works, the Applicant was required, by
, to apply to the Strata
Company for approval, by way of a resolution without dissent, pursuant to
27 An application was made to the Strata Company by the Applicant in April
2004. The application to the Strata Company set out the
particulars required by
and by Reg 34
28 The agenda for the EGM, as set out in the Notice in respect of that Meeting,
contained the following motion under
"That the Strata Company by resolution without dissent pursuant to
Strata Titles Act 1985
approves the application by the proprietor of lot 1
to carry out works on the lots as described in the application dated 7 April
2004 a copy of which is attached to and forms part of this notice and
Section 7(4)(a)
specifies that such a Notice of Meeting must incorporate a
statement in terms required by
That requirement was
30 The application was considered by the Strata Company at an Extraordinary
General Meeting on 4 May 2004. The Minutes record that
there was a "sufficient
quorum" present, as required by
in relation to voting on a resolution
without dissent but that as there were a number of dissenting votes, the motion
the application failed to satisfy the requirements for a resolution
without dissent.
Responses to
application
31 This application has been supported by the proprietors of 5 lots and opposed
by the proprietors of 2 lots.
Responses in support
32 The proprietor of Lot 2, which is adjacent to Lot 1, has included the
"...providing we are satisfied with the structural integrity of any works that a
proprietor should be able to alter their apartment
as they wish to suit their
We were indeed satisfied with the 2 independent reports from structural
engineers, especially Arup Australia, the original engineers
in the complex when
constructed and Wood & Grieve Engineers who independently tested Arup's
(Note: a number of submissions have referred to "Arup Australia" but I
understand that the correct name is "Arup Australasia" which
will be referred to
in these Reasons as "Arup").
33 Another proprietor has submitted:
"It is our understanding that the proposed works will be confined to the
interior of the relevant unit, have no plot ratio implications
and would not
result in a structure that is visible from outside the lot and that is not in
keeping with the rest of the development.
No easement would be interfered with
if these proposed alterations are permitted to proceed...The proposed structural
changes are
relatively minor...We have been informed that alterations in several
other units of this complex have involved the removal of walls
or wall sections,
without adverse effects being detected in any other section of the building.
It is our belief that Zayre Pty Ltd has attempted to minimise inconvenience
associated with the proposed works to other residents
of the complex to the
extent that this is possible.
It is also our understanding that Zayre Pty Ltd would obtain evidence of current
insurance cover of contractors involved in the proposed
works and provide copies
of these to the Strata Company...I know of no information which would support a
contention that the proposed
works represent a threat to the structural
soundness of the building ..."
34 Similar views have been submitted by another proprietor who states that many
precedents for safe alterations have been made.
For example, Units 5, 6, 7 and 8
in Block B have previously had walls or parts of walls removed without causing
damage to surrounding
units or to the building as a whole and that
"the proprietors in opposition to the application fail to provide any relevant
reasons for their opposition, other than that the
work may affect the structural
soundness of the buildings. This view was not confirmed by any architectural or
structural engineering
expertise..."
Opposition to application
35 The proprietor of Lot 8 claims that the Strata Company has previously
discouraged the removal of load-bearing walls on the ground
"Investigations had revealed some differential settlement causing wall cracks
and the discovery of a faulty sub-soil drain in the
east side of Block A...The
site is an estuarine river flat with soil that is likely to be in a fairly loose
condition ...The removal
of load bearing walls on the ground floor is possibly
unwise in the circumstances. ...
There does not appear to be any documentation provided from the two firms of
structural engineers who have reviewed the proposed
alterations where a specific
statement regarding the structural soundness of the units is
36 She refers to a recent report that was forwarded by Peter C. Bruechle, a
consultant chartered engineer. I will refer to that
report ("the Breuchle
report") in more detail later in these Reasons.
37 The most detailed submission in opposition to the application has been
provided by a Mr James Lissiman, the proprietor of Lot
4 on the Strata Plan. He
is also the treasurer of the Strata Company.
38 He reports that he was involved in the development of the complex in 1980,
that he has been the proprietor of 2 units since 1982
and that he has tertiary
qualifications in geology, with experience in mining engineering and structural
engineering.
39 He refers to a 1960 CSIRO report and to the Geological Survey of Western
Australia Explanatory Notes of 1978 which he states
define the Pelican Point
" poorly drained clayey estuarine river flat covered by a thin layer (usually
less than 1 metre) of porous wind blown
40 The architects of the development are said to have included in their Defects
Report of 13 September 1983, in relation to Block
"Brick paving to the south of the covered link is sitting on a soft clay base
and is extremely unstable, this area is still subject
to flooding. Paving on the
north side of the link has subsided in
41 Mr Lissiman claims to have referred them to a vertical crack in the south
wall of a bathroom in Lot 10 (in Block A) but
"...it was soon after discovered that it extended upwards through the overlying
units 13, 16 to 19 on the top floor"
42 and that
"It was also noticed that this crack was almost directly over a tension crack in
the garage floor slab".
43 He claims that there were other cracks which were not reported, but
"while it appeared that some of these cracks may have been due to structural
problems they seem to have stabilised after a year or
so and were ascribed to
normal settling of the buildings ...
However, in 1997, following the installation of a formal garden with increased
water consumption, the original cracks opened up within
a year and new ones
44 He has advised that in 1999 the Strata Company engaged Arup to inspect and
report on the cause of the cracks. As a result, it
was confirmed that the cracks
were due in part at least to renewed differential settlement of the foundation.
He states that further
investigation revealed a faulty sub-soil drain adjacent
to the suspect foundations of the east side of Block A. However, he contends
that Arup did not carry out a geotechnical survey of the site, nor provide for a
drainage system to protect the foundations.
45 He concedes that all of those structural problems relate to Block A which he
"principally supported by column and pad foundations with perimeter strip
foundations".
46 However, in relation to Block B, he claims that in the original plumbing
installations, there was no provision for drains to
protect the Block B
perimeter and that
"since 2000 we have had drier than usual winters and stringent year round water
restrictions and the east side Block A foundations
appear to have stabilised
47 He submits that:
"Block B ... largely rests on strip foundations with small columns and pads
beneath its south-eastern elevation and... there are
no perimeter sub-soil
drains to this block.
Already at Block B there appears to be subsidence in the column and pad at the
south eastern corner of U/1, as evidenced by the cracking
of the tiles on the
ground floor patio. This cracking resembles the cracking of the paving tiles at
U/10, which was early evidence
of the differential settlement at Block A.
It is difficult to resist the impression that there are shortcomings in Arup's
foundation design to cater for a site of suspect stability
as it is essentially
damp clay and, when saturated, can become pulpy.
Alterations, as in this proposal where load bearing ground floor wall removals
are planned, distort the original distributed design
loadings on the foundations
...the deepest parts of the Pelican Point Apartment foundations, the base of
lift shafts, are actually below mean sea (i.e. river)
48 Mr Lissiman challenges the statement about insurance. He has provided me
with a copy of a letter dated 5 July 2004 from the Strata
Company's insurers,
CHU, which confirms that the Strata Company's policy does not cover liability
for work carried out by individual
lot proprietors and
"The onus for such liability is on the lot owner who must ensure that his
contractor provides evidence to CHU and our Insurance Broker
OAMPS that his
current policies are adequate to cover any consequent damages arising from the
proposed alterations".
49 In relation to the Wood & Grieve report, Mr Lissiman claims those
engineers never visited the property and that it appears
to him that they relied
totally on Arup for information. If this is the case, he considers that their
report cannot be deemed to
be an "independent" report.
50 He considers that it is significant that 5 of the 8 who voted in favour of
the proposal have been owners of lots in the scheme
for less than four years and
"...although the valid voting at the EGM on a show of hands was even with 8 for
and 8 against, on a poll the voting would have been
76 for and 86 against
approval. In either instance, the EGM vote was in the
(a) the Strata Company's Sch 2, by-law 12(7) specifies
that the vote of a general meeting is to be decided on a show of hands unless
poll is demanded. On a poll, each lot proprietor has votes commensurate with the
unit entitlement allocated to his or her lot.
Voting on a resolution without
dissent is also on the basis of unit entitlements.
(b) the Strata Company's Sch 1, by-law 12(11) provides that in the case of
equality in votes, the question is to be deemed to be determined
51 Mr Lissiman has provided the Breuchle report, being a report dated 8 July
2004, as commissioned by Mr Lissiman. I will refer
to that report after
referring to the other two engineering reports.
Considerations
52 The Minutes of the EGM record that all of those voting against the proposal
(other than the proprietor of Lot 13), specified
their grounds of refusal
"The proposal may affect the structural soundness of the
and that the proprietor of Lot 13
"dissented on the grounds of warranty which is an invalid reason".
53 As indicated above, because there were dissenting votes, the motion failed
to meet the requirements of a resolution without dissent.
54 As only the ground set out in
s 7(5)(b)(ii)
has been validly raised as
the basis of refusal to give approval, this review of that decision will be
confined to a consideration
of that ground.
55 Mr Lissiman, whose objections have been set out earlier in these Reasons,
was one of the dissenting voters who relied on that
ground of objection.
The engineering reports
56 On 6 April 2004, Arup reported to the
"This fax is to summarise the design and documentation that we have carried out
for you and shown on our drawings 83464/50/S1 to
Our earlier faxes of 06/02/04 and 05/03/04 relate but are no longer totally
accurate due to the evolution of the design.
However the following points from the above faxes remain very
a) Our company were the consulting
structural engineers for the building when it was built in 1980 and have in our
archives the structural
drawings, structural calculations and architectural
b) All of the existing masonry walls are load bearing so it has been
necessary to carefully consider the effect on the structure of
the removal of
c) Prior to removing any of the existing load bearing walls a system of
temporary steel props and beams will be installed to support
the structure over
your unit. This will allow the safe removal of the relevant sections of existing
load bearing walls and their
replacement by the new permanent steel columns and
d) The details of the temporary and permanent structure are shown on the
drawings together with detailed construction procedures.
e) Arup will make site inspections as shown in the Construction Procedures to
ensure the work is being carried out in accordance with
the design intent.
We have also prepared 'Proposed Programme for Structural Work' which
incorporates the requirements of the above
57 On 27 April 2004, Wood & Grieve reported to the
"We confirm that we have been engaged by Zayre Pty Ltd to undertake an
independent Structural Engineering Design Review of the proposed
alterations to Unit 1 – Pelican Point Apartments.
Applicable documents referred to in the review
• A3 set of drawings as listed on Arup
drawing number 83464/50/S1/1.
• Arup Fax dated 6 April 2004.
• Proposed program for structural work.
We have reviewed the Arup drawings and program for these works and advise as
• The design documentation is
comprehensive and well detailed.
• We are satisfied that the procedures and details provided will ensure
the stability of the building as a whole.
We trust the above information meets your requirements. We are a Quality
Endorsed Company with an independently audited Quality Management
undertaking this review we confirm that we are experienced in design work of the
58 In a report to me on 25 July 2004, Wood & Grieve has advised that their
• "...to undertake an independent peer review of the detailed structural
design undertaken by Arup with regard to proposed
modifications to Unit 1 of the
Pelican Point Apartments.
• In so doing we relied on the information contained within the original
structural drawings of the development. No better
information can be sourced for
works of this nature than the original structural drawings and all parties
concerned are fortunate
that this information is available in this case.
• We do not consider that visiting the site would have provided greater
familiarisation with the structure of the property
as the pertinent elements of
the structure are effectively hidden. Nor were we engaged to undertake a
dilapidation survey of the
property or assess any drainage issues that may exist
with the existing property. Nor were we engaged to assess the existence of
pre-existing structural problems or defects within the existing building. Such
considerations may be pertinent to the owners
of the development but are not
relevant to the assessment of the adequacy of the structural design associated
with the proposed renovations
• Our brief in this matter has been to review the proposed Arup design and
we are satisfied that the information provided with
respect to the existing
building has been sufficiently comprehensive to enable such an assessment to be
undertaken".
59 The Bruechle report is based on Mr Bruechle's consideration of some of the
relevant correspondence, copies of the original structural
and architectural
drawings and drawings showing Arup's proposals. He also visited the site.
60 His view is that the following matters, that arise out of the proposed
works, will affect the building and its
• "The site is unlikely to provide a completely stable foundation.
• The existing footings have shortcomings for such a site.
• Removal of existing load bearing walls always entails risks to adjacent
units above.
• The structure proposed does not exactly replace the elements
• There will be nuisance and vibration during the building activities that
are likely to bring incipient problems to the fore
and will interfere with those
living in the units for a period.
2.2 Site Conditions
My understanding is that no investigation has ever been carried out on this
... There have been some indications that the site is subject to differential
settlements such as that brick paving has subsided
and vertical cracks occurred
shortly after the buildings were built through several floors.
This is almost certainly not a stable site as Arup has said and any change in
the loading patterns on it is likely to cause differential
movement. Although
these movements are unlikely to be great it is highly likely they will cause
cracks in brittle wall materials
such as render or tiles. Damage can be expected
if the work is carried out.
This does not imply that the structure will remain completely inert even if the
proposed works are not carried out and there is no
change in the loading
patterns. Although the buildings are now settled changes in the moisture regimes
in the underlying clays or
gradual consolidation of voids are likely to cause
further cracking with time.
2.3 Footing Shortcomings
...In this case higher footings have been built at angles of 45 degrees above
adjacent footings, which is unusual in foundation material
of this type. This
angle is allowed for temporary excavations in clay but it is not allowed in sand
so Arup have certainly stretched
normal allowances around the lift well in Block
B. Unless the lift well was properly backfilled and compacted, and I believe
is no record that this is so, creep away of material from under the higher
footings is likely. Although the exact conditions are
not known this is a
further example of a possible fragility that could cause problems if the current
conditions are interfered with.
2.4 Wall Removal
No matter how carefully propping is done or how conscientiously walls are
removed and replaced minor movements are inevitable. These
are likely to cause
cracking to adjacent walls, especially those above. A thorough dilapidation
survey must be carried out and an
agreement regarding the repair of damage
reached prior to any work going ahead. ...
2.5 Shortcomings in the Proposed Steel framing
There are two shortcomings in the steel framing proposed by Arup. These are that
the framing is not fireproof even though it is at
the bottom of three stories
and it alters the load pattern of the structure on footings that are on a
doubtful foundation.
The change in the distribution of loading onto the footings is also marginal,
but it could cause minor differential movements sufficient
to create cracking in
adjacent walls. Such cracking will not be structurally significant but it is
likely to be visible and to require
2.6 Incipient Problems and Nuisance
...During demolition and construction there will be noise, vibration, traffic
and possibly dust. These are inevitable for a construction
3. STRUCTURAL STABILITY
I would like to make it clear that I do not consider the proposed works will
cause structural instability. Wood and Grieve are almost
certainly correct in
their report in that the works will not cause any structural shortcoming.
However, structural stability is not
the only, or even the main, issue in this
case. If Wood and Grieve had been asked whether the proposed works would cause
and nuisance their response is likely to have been
61 Mr Bruechle has also included the following some suggestions about matters
that need to be agreed before commencing the works,
"It will be necessary for a dilapidation survey to be carried out, cracks noted
and marked and a photographic record made. This work
should be carried out by an
independent, skilled party at the cost of whoever is instigating the works and
the findings agreed by
all parties".
62 The Applicant's response to the Bruechle report
"...there are now three engineers who are of the same opinion in effect: the
proposed works will not affect the structural soundness
of the building.
5. Mr Bruechle does not seem to be aware that
, note FPI provides that 'Structural steel and fixings shall
be two-hour fire rated';
• Proposed Program for Structural Work, notes A12, B9 and C9 each
allows for 3 days (a total 9 days) to 'Fire Proof Steel';
• Specifications produce a fire rating that exceeds building code
requirements.
6. Mr Bruechle does not appear to be aware that Arup's Plan
Condition Survey that is to be completed prior to work beginning This will
comprehensively document the current condition
of the building.
7. Mr Bruechle reports that no Geotechnical Engineering Survey Report was
ever obtained. That is not true. ... a copy of a Geotechnical
Engineering Survey
Report dated July 18 1980 from Golder Associates – Geotechnical
Engineering Consultants.
10. Almost all of Mr Lissiman's submission concerns Block A. The proposed
works are to be conducted in lot 1 in Block B.
11. Blocks A and B are not connected structurally. The two blocks are
separated by a distance of approximately 21 metres. Block A
is far larger in
mass and height.
12. In the 22 years since its completion, Block B has not been known to have
any structural problems.
13. Even the Defects Inspection List of 1983 did not list anything related to
the Block B structure.
14. A few cracked tiles on a structurally independent patio do not indicate
any structural problem. The tiled patio is an independent
floating concrete slab
without foundations sitting on deep compacted sand abutting but unconnected to
the main structure.
15. In 1999, Arup reported that:
• The cracks and jammed doors in the top floor unit (19) appear to be
the results of settlement and small rotation of pad footings
• The vertical cracks in the bathroom tiles appear to be due to the
expansion effects of brick masonry in the adjoining wall.
The crack is not
structurally significant.
• The large crack formed in the patio adjacent to Unit 10 is most
likely caused by settlement of the earth fill on which it
is constructed. The
patio area may undergo further deflection if the compaction of the fill has not
ceased. The crack is not structurally
significant.
16. In brief, Arup found the investigated cracks as structurally
insignificant.
18. The Council again discussed the 'structural soundness' issue on 8 June
2004. Past investigations and reports were again discussed,
together with all
further available information. At that meeting, two proprietors, Mr Ian Cameron,
a licensed surveyor experienced
in professional measuring movement in building
structures and Mr Matt Preisig a machinery engineer who has been most
responsible
for maintaining the common property since about 1986 reported on
their views. The Council unanimously concluded that the known information
only support a belief that the buildings retained their structural integrity and
no further investigations were required.
21. Lot 1 is located at the ground floor southeast corner of Block B so there
are no residents below, nor on one side. It has direct
access to the open public
reserve in front of Block B. For reasons of efficiency and no nuisance, all
access to the worksite will
be via that open public reserve direct into lot
22. The proposed works are relatively minor and uncomplicated, will not take
long and the builders will minimise nuisance, by all
means available".
63 On the question of insurance, the Strata Company's insurance broker OAMPS
reported, on 16 February 2004, that
"... we confirm the Insurance policy arranged on behalf of the Owner of Pelican
Point Apartments provides for construction contracts
up to the value of $200 000
to take place without penalty or restriction.
Normal policy terms and conditions apply and any damage or Liability incurred
would be fully recoverable from the parties responsible.
We recommend, in the strongest possible terms, any contractors provide evidence
of having arranged Insurance for:
Compensation
• Public and Products Liability
• Contract Works"
64 CHU, the Strata Company's insurer, wrote to Mr Lissiman on 5 July 2004,
STRATA PLAN 10400
POLICY NO: 868255
PELICAN POINT APARTMENTS
I am writing to confirm our discussions regarding the above Strata Complex.
The above policy is issued in the name of the Strata Company and does not cover
the liabilities of the various Lot Owners or Contractors
they may employ to work
within their individual lots.
Your policy will not pay for any material damage or liability claim arising out
of construction, erection, demolition, alteration
or addition to your building
where the cost of such works exceeds $200 000, unless our written consent is
provided prior to commencement
of the works. It should be pointed out, that it
is a specific exclusion in the policy for damage caused by vibration, or removal
or interference with the support of the land or buildings. As the ground floor
Lot Owner intends to remove load bearing walls, I
would strongly
1. The contractor carrying out the
intended renovation provide Certificate of Currencies of his Insurance Policies
for Construction
Risk, Public Liability and Workers' Compensation.
2. A comprehensive damage report be carried out at the premises in all Lots
prior to commencement of any renovation works. Removal
of load bearing walls on
a ground level almost always gives rise to cracking in ceramic wall and floor
tiles and walls in upper levels.
A similar report following the completion of the works will show any damages
caused by the
renovation."
65 While I can appreciate the genuine concerns raised by those objecting to the
proposal, particularly by Mr Lissiman, it appears
to me that the Applicant has
sought and obtained appropriate professional structural engineering advice and
that that advice has
been appropriately reviewed.
66 The objections of those opposing the application are largely based on a
number of assumptions and, in the case of Mr Lissiman's
response, on
broader-based older reports on soil types and settlement of the structures of
Blocks A and B on their respective soil
bases and foundations.
67 However, none of the objectors has provided any independent contemporary
report which has materially contradicted the engineering
reports obtained by the
68 In these circumstances, I am prepared to find that the refusal to approve
the proposals was unreasonable, but the Applicant must
still obtain all
necessary local government approvals, give the 14 days' notice required by Sch
2, by-law 13, before commencing any
of the works and must deal with the
insurance issues that have been
allows me to express an order in terms other than sought,
provided that my order does not differ in substance from the order sought
allows me to includes in an order such ancillary or consequential
provisions as I think fit, my Order is:
"Subject to the Zayre Pty Ltd, as the proprietor of Lot 1 on Strata Plan 10400
("the Strata Plan"), at its cost
(1) providing to
the insurers of "The Owners of Pelican Point Apartments – Strata Plan
10400" ("the Strata Company")
(a) Certificates of Currency of Insurance Policies for Construction Risk,
Public Liability and Workers' Compensation in respect of
insurance cover under
such policies to such respective levels and for such respective risks as the
said insurer reasonably specifies;
(b) a comprehensive damage report to be carried out in the eastern-most
residential building on Strata Plan 10400 ("Block B") before
the commencement of
any works within Lot 1 on the said Strata Plan in such form and containing such
detail as the said insurer reasonably
2. Not varying or permitting the variation of any of the plans and
specifications voted on by the Strata Company on 4 May 2004
specifications"), without the approval of the Strata Company expressed by way of
a resolution without dissent and
written approval of the insurers
referred to in (a) and (b) above; and
3. Before commencement of any works specified in the plans and specifications
("the works") at its cost providing to the Strata Company
true copies of all
certificates of statutory approval and licences required for those works,
Zayre Pty Ltd is deemed to have been given approval to carry out the works in
accordance with the plans and specifications at its
cost and risk in all
DATED 1 September 2004
_________________________________
RJ KRONBERGER
STRATA TITLES REFEREE
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (135 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter