URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WASCA/2025/160.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:08:15
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
DUNNE (A PSEUDONYM) -v- LLOYD (A PSEUDONYM) [No 3] [2025] WASCA 160 (4 November 2025)
COURT OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
THE COURT OF APPEAL
(A PSEUDONYM) -v- LLOYD (A PSEUDONYM) [No 3]
[2025] WASCA 160
OCTOBER 2025
DELIVERED :
NOVEMBER 2025
CACV 50 of 2025
(A PSEUDONYM)
(A PSEUDONYM)
COURT OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
(A PSEUDONYM) and DUNNE (A PSEUDONYM)
[2025] FCWA 120
PTW 5273 of 2021
law - Parenting orders - 'Reversal of care' orders - Where primary orders give
sole parental responsibility of children to
father - Where mother has appealed
against primary orders - Application for stay of primary orders pending
determination of the appeal
- Principles governing stay applications in
parenting matters
Legislation:
Court Act 1997
Representation:
T Farmer SC and V
P Giles SC and C
Solicitors:
Klimek & Wijay Family
Gillian Marks &
referred to in decision(s):
OF THE COURT
is an appeal against 'reversal of care' parenting orders. The child (who we
shall refer to using the pseudonym
), has just had his fifth
birthday. Since birth he has been raised in Perth by his mother, who separated
from his father while pregnant.
The 'reversal of care' orders made in May 2025
ordered that William should reside with the father, and that the father should
sole parental responsibility for William. The father operates a farm and
lives in rural South Australia. The mother has appealed
against the 'reversal
of care' orders.
outcome of the appeal will have a substantial effect upon William's future,
perhaps more so than the usual appeal against parenting
orders. He will grow up
in urban Perth and attend school in the western suburbs if he is in the care of
his mother, whereas he will
be raised in rural South Australia if he is in the
care of his father. Moreover, as accepted by the learned trial judge, '[b]oth
parents clearly love their son and their attitude to him is a loving
However, the fact that his parents live in vastly different circumstances on
opposite sides of Australia means that William must
inevitably grow up in one
place or the other. Regrettably, it falls to the judiciary to make this
decision, where the parents are
unable to cooperate to do so.
far, this court has already given two judgments in this matter. The first
concerned the jurisdiction of the court to hear this
This court concluded that it had jurisdiction to hear the appeal. The second
judgment concerned whether a 'stay' of the orders should
be granted prior to the
hearing of the substance of the
In substance, the proposed stay was to reverse the effect of the 'reversal of
care' orders, which had already been carried into effect.
The 'stay' was
considering the substance of the appeal, it is helpful to start with the nature
of the parenting orders which are challenged,
and the reasons why the trial
judge made the 'reversal of care' orders.
Legislative framework for parenting orders
parenting order is an order made under
Family Court Act 1997
) dealing with a matter that is
mentioned in
s 84(1)(a).
Section 84(2)
provides that a parenting order may deal with various matters, including: the
person or persons with whom a child is to live (para
(a)); the time a child
is to spend with another person or other persons (para (b)); the allocation
of parental responsibility for
a child (para (c)); the communication a
child is to have with another person or other persons (para (e));
maintenance of a child
(para (f)); and any aspect of the care, welfare or
development of the child or any other aspect of parental responsibility for a
child (para (i)).
Section 89(1)
relevantly provides the power to make such parenting order as the court thinks
Section 66A
In deciding whether to make a particular parenting order in relation to a child,
a court must regard the best interests of the child
as the paramount
consideration.
the time of the hearing of the trial,
relevantly provided that, in
determining what is in the child's best interests, the court must consider the
matters set out in
These provisions set out primary considerations and additional considerations.
They were amended with effect from 10 February 2025
Family Court Amendment (Commonwealth Reforms)
2024 Amendments
However, transitional provisions provide that the pre‑amendment form of
s 66C continues to apply in proceedings (such as
the present) where the
final hearing commenced prior to 10 February
to the 2024 Amendments, s 66C(2) provided:
The primary considerations are -
(a) the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of
the child's parents; and
(b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being
subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family
prior to the 2024 Amendments, s 66C(3)
Additional considerations are -
(a) any views expressed by the child and any factors (such as the child's
maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks
are relevant to the
weight it should give to the child's views; and
(b) the nature of the relationship of the child with -
(i) each of the child's parents; and
(ii) other persons (including any grandparent or other relative of the child);
(c) the extent to which each of the child's parents has taken, or failed to
take, the opportunity -
(i) to participate in making decisions about major long‑term issues in
relation to the child; and
(ii) to spend time with the child; and
(iii) to communicate with the
(da) the extent to which each of the child's parents has fulfilled, or failed to
fulfil, the parent's obligations to maintain the
(d) the likely effect of any changes in the child's circumstances, including the
likely effect on the child of any separation from
(i) either of his or her parents; or
(ii) any other child, or other person (including any grandparent or other
relative of the child), with whom he or she has been living;
(e) the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and
communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty
or expense will
substantially affect the child's right to maintain personal relations and direct
(f) the capacity of -
(i) each of the child's parents; and
(ii) any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the
to provide for the needs of the child,
including emotional and intellectual needs; and
(g) the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture
and traditions) of the child and of either of the child's
parents, and any other
characteristics of the child that the court thinks are relevant; and
(h) if the child is an Aboriginal child or a Torres Strait Islander
(i) the child's right to enjoy his or her Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander
culture (including the right to enjoy that culture
with other people who share
that culture); and
(ii) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this Part will have on
that right;
(i) the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood,
demonstrated by each of the child's parents; and
(j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child's family;
(k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member
of the child's family ‑ any relevant inferences
that can be
drawn from the order, taking into account the following -
(i) the nature of the order;
(ii) the circumstances in which the order was made;
(iii) any evidence admitted in proceedings for the order;
(iv) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order;
(v) any other relevant
(l) whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely
to lead to the institution of further proceedings
in relation to the child;
(m) any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is
Judicial discretion involved in making parenting
the legislative framework described demonstrates, making a parenting order
requires the exercise of a judicial discretion, albeit
in a highly structured
way. Consequently, in
Bondelmonte v
Bondelmonte
the High Court recognised that it is only an error of the kind referred
House v The
which will permit an appellate court to interfere with parenting orders
made in the exercise of a judicial discretion by a primary
judge under the
federal equivalent of s 89(1) of the FCA.
the Court explained in
House v The
It must appear that some error has been made in exercising the discretion. If
the judge acts upon a wrong principle, if he allows
extraneous or irrelevant
matters to guide or affect him, if he mistakes the facts, if he does not take
into account some material
consideration, then his determination should be
reviewed and the appellate court may exercise its own discretion in substitution
for his if it has the materials for doing so. It may not appear how the primary
judge has reached the result embodied in his order,
but, if upon the facts it is
unreasonable or plainly unjust, the appellate court may infer that in some way
there has been a failure
properly to exercise the discretion which the law
reposes in the court of first instance. In such a case, although the nature of
the error may not be discoverable, the exercise of the discretion is reviewed on
the ground that a substantial wrong has in fact
features of a parenting order that engage the
House v The King
standard of review were explained by Kiefel, Bell, Keane, Nettle and
Gordon JJ in
Bondelmonte
terms of the federal equivalent of the old form of s 66C prior to the 2024
Amendments:
A parenting order made under [s 89] involves the exercise of a judicial
discretion because it is made by reference to a paramount
consideration of a
general kind, the best interests of the child, which involves an overall
assessment of a number of other considerations,
either statutorily prescribed or
considered by the court to be relevant. The primary considerations in
[s 66C(2)] are matters to
be borne in mind as consistent with the objects
of Pt [5]. The additional considerations in [s 66C(3)] require
assessments of the
matters there listed by reference to the circumstances of the
case. They involve value judgements in respect of which there may
be room for
reasonable differences of opinion, as does the overall assessment of what is in
the best interests of the child. (footnotes
Factual analysis
father was 39 years old and the mother was 42 years old when the
learned trial judge gave judgment on 29 May
The father is a farmer in rural South
The mother is an accountant. She presently works for a large mining
having met whilst working at a mine site in Western
Australia on a fly‑in
The mother became pregnant in about November 2019, and commenced living with the
father at his farmhouse in rural South Australia
in late December
mother returned to Perth on 29 May 2020 (while COVID restrictions limiting
interstate entry into Western Australia were in
William was born in August
The mother returned, with William, to live with the father in South Australia in
The mother and William left South Australia to return to Perth on
The mother planned to live with William in Perth while the father was doing FIFO
work, but to join the father on breaks from the
FIFO work in South
However, the relationship between the mother and the father ended on
18 December
the end of 2020 and 29 May 2025, William lived with the mother in Perth
until the 'reversal of care' orders were made. Since
29 May 2025, William
has resided with the father in South Australia.
trial judge analysed the credibility of various witnesses, and set out a
chronology of various incidents which occurred during
the period while the
mother and the father resided together in South Australia or while the father
sought access to William in Perth.
Significant credibility findings – the father and
Notwithstanding
some difficulties which the father had with financial disclosures, the trial
judge said that the father did not have
a 'dishonest approach' to those
disclosures, although he may have been 'cavalier and disrespectful' about
the other hand, the trial judge was critical of the credibility of the mother.
This was based upon various matters, including
her evidence about using a
private investigator to surveil the father. The trial judge considered that the
mother's evidence about
the private investigator was 'entirely unsatisfactory',
and that she feigned a lack of memory to avoid having to disclose the
arrangements
she hoped to keep secret from the
regard also to certain financial matters, and the interaction of the mother with
a child psychologist for William, the trial
judge concluded as
Considering the totality of her evidence and being mindful of the caution to be
adopted with respect to credibility, unless her version
is supported by
extrinsic evidence I have a little faith in the written and oral evidence of
[the mother] and prefer the evidence
of [the father] whenever it conflicts with
that of [the mother].
Significant credibility
findings ‑ expert witnesses
learned trial judge also specifically considered the evidence of two expert
witnesses. One of these was Ms Eliza Hatton, who
was the single expert
witness appointed pursuant to orders made by the trial judge. She is a
registered psychologist, not a clinical
psychologist.
The other expert witness of importance was Mr Cris de Rooster,
who is a clinical psychologist and who was engaged to provide reportable
therapy pursuant to orders made by the trial
relation to Ms Hatton, the trial judge carefully considered her
In my view, Ms Hatton failed to properly assess [the mother's] views about
[the father] and her contribution to the parties' conflict
including her failure
to facilitate overnight time and its impact upon [the father]. I consider
Ms Hatton's reports reveal her to
have been an advocate for [the mother].
My view was strengthened by the manner in which she gave her oral evidence
particularly
when being cross‑examined by the solicitor for [the mother]
during which I consider Ms Hatton seemed unreasonably eager to
[the father].
I decline to accord Ms Hatton's opinions significant weight and prefer the
evidence and opinions of Mr De Rooster.
Notwithstanding
this, the trial judge accepted the opinion of Ms Hatton about the 'drastic'
effect of 'reversal of care' orders,
and that such orders could have a profound
psychological and emotional impact upon a 4‑year‑old
Ms Hatton was of the opinion that a 'reversal of care' could lead to
anxiety, confusion and a sense of abandonment, and foster insecure
styles. In Ms Hatton's second report tendered at trial, she also outlined
certain other adverse outcomes which could
be caused by a 'reversal of
As well, the trial judge accepted the opinion of Ms Hatton that the
conflict between the mother and father was 'intractable', which
meant that they
would be unable to effectively co‑parent or undertake parallel
contrast to the evidence of Ms Hatton, the trial judge considered that
Mr De Rooster gave evidence 'in a careful and balanced
manner' and
accepted his evidence. He made the following observations based upon the
evidence of
Mr De Rooster:
I accept that Mr De Rooster accurately recorded his interactions with
[the mother]. Mr De Rooster said a complicating factor was
mother's fear of the father which made unlikely her ability to reassure
[William] if he does display distress prior to or after
spending time with the
father. Mr De Rooster said this was a double setback for [William]
because the parent who needed to reassure
him was also creating uncertainty for
Mr De Rooster considered that the mother's permissive or over
parenting style did not provide [William] with sufficient effective
guidance and
management of his behaviour. He considered [the mother] will be overprotective
of [William] and find it difficult to
promote his relationship with [the
Mr De Rooster concluded it would not be possible to 'improve
communication or to reduce conflict between the parties given [the mother's]
fear and negative perceptions of [the father]'.
Findings over access disputes
do not propose to rehearse the difficulties of the father gaining access to
William while William lived in Perth with the mother.
It is sufficient to say
that the trial judge found that:
(a) there were occasions when the mother unilaterally decided that she did not
need to comply with orders requiring the father to
have access to William,
sleepovers.
There was at least one occasion when the father had undertaken significant
effort to travel from South Australia, but was denied
This was due to the mother regarding herself as 'the sole arbiter of what was in
[William's] best
interests';
(b) there were occasions when the mother, in preparing William for access time
with the father, exposed William to her own beliefs
and caused William to become agitated or
(c) the mother used access to William as a weapon in the interpersonal conflict
she had with the
(d) there was difficulty at handovers, due to the mother being present at those
handovers or in the vicinity of the handovers. The
difficulties appeared to
arise from, or to be contributed to by, the permissive parenting style of the
mother who would endeavour
to provide choice to William about whether to see his
(e) there were difficulties in electronic communications by telephone and video
between William and the father, when the mother would
not assist by ensuring
that William was given back the phone if he put it down or dropped it, and
leaving it to William to focus
his attention on the
Existence of parental conflict
considering the appropriate parenting orders, the trial judge identified the
existence of parental conflict, which he considered
The trial judge found that the appellant 'was mostly responsible for the
escalation of the parties'
He considered that the father's criticisms of the mother 'generally were
proportionate to her
behaviours'.
He also said that he was 'entirely sceptical that [the mother] is appropriately
psychologically minded and insightful when it comes
to [William and the
The trial judge found that 'the conflict between the parties is intractable due
largely to [the mother's] feelings towards [the
He also found that he had no confidence that the appellant would now follow the
orders imposed by the court, given her repeated failures
to comply with previous
orders, her fixed view of the respondent and the untrustworthiness of much of
Findings over mother's and father's ability to control
William's behaviours
trial judge also made certain significant findings about the ability of the
mother to control William's behaviours. These should
be set out in
[The mother] was regularly unable to efficiently transition [William] to [the
father] at handover. The supervision reports reveal
numerous drawn out
handovers which must have been exhausting, if not agonising, for everyone
particularly [William]. [The mother]
was also unable to manage [William's]
behaviours at home noting that I do not consider [William] suffered from
anything more than
mild separation anxiety. On her own evidence when overnight
time started in September 2022 [William] was very clingy, became upset
was unavailable, would not eat and would throw and hit items. In 2023 [William]
was sleeping poorly and had trouble with
his appetite around visits. When
overnight time restarted in 2023 [William] started having nightmares again,
reverted to baby talk
and started to wet his pants. Before visits, [William]
would tell [the mother] he felt unwell like he was going to throw up. In
2024, [the mother] told Mr De Rooster that [William] continued to have
crying fits, screamed, yelled, hit and spat at her.
She said when [William]
screamed in her face it could last for 30 to 45 minutes. (footnotes
trial judge later
The outlook for [William] is a problematic one. I accept [the father's]
evidence that [William's] behaviour with him is not dysregulated.
(...) [William's] behaviour when with [the mother] is often
dysregulated.
Subsequently,
the trial judge considered that the father was better able to manage William's
behaviour compared to the
No finding of risk of sexualised behaviour or harm from
farm machinery
of William's male cousins, who live nearby to his father's residence, are
slightly older than William. The mother alleged
at trial that she had been told
that they had been caught engaging in fellatio with each other when aged between
four to six years
The mother alleged that this type of activity presented a risk to William if
placed in the father's care.
the absence of any evidence from the person who allegedly told the mother of
these events, and cross‑examination of this
person, the trial judge did
not find that this incident had occurred. He accepted that there may have been
an incident where they
were comparing the size of their
However, he refused to find that William's cousins presented any risk to
mother also suggested that there was a risk of harm to William from operating
farm machinery. However, the father accepted that
William should not be allowed
anywhere near heavy farm equipment. He accepted the recommendation that
children under 16 should not
ride quad bikes. The trial judge concluded
that the father was safety conscious and that William was not at risk from the
Reasons of trial judge for 'reversal of care'
trial judge specifically considered each of the primary considerations set out
in s 66C(2) and each of the additional considerations
s 66C(3), as those provisions stood prior to the 2024 Amendments. This is
apparent from the
as the trial judge set out the text of each of the considerations followed by
his observations about each of them.
first primary consideration is the benefit to the child of having a meaningful
relationship with both of the child's
The trial judge considered that William had a meaningful relationship with the
father, that William had benefited from this relationship,
and that in the
future, William would derive considerable benefit from its
continuation.
trial judge also concluded that William's relationship with the mother was
important and significant to him. However, he went
... I am troubled about the quality of that relationship. In my view, it is
likely that [the mother] has not been able to shield
[William] from her feelings
away and run away. [The
mother's] description of [William's] behaviours at home
evidence a child in turmoil over several years which, as hypothesised by
Mr De Rooster, I consider is likely due to her conduct either by
splitting [William's] loyalties or [William] becoming frustrated
perceptions or parenting style. [The mother's] failure to properly manage
handovers has also likely resulted in [William]
regularly becoming traumatised
by her behaviour. I suspect that [William] is regularly worried about his
mother's emotional state.
[William] will benefit from having a meaningful relationship with [the mother]
if her physiological anxiety reactions, hypervigilance
and paranoia as described
in [her psychologist's] notes improve.
second primary consideration in s 66C(2)(b) is the need to protect the
child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected
to, or exposed
to, abuse, neglect or family violence. As explained, the trial judge found that
there was no risk to William of sexualised
behaviour due to his cousins, and the
trial judge also found that there was no risk of harm from farm machinery to
William. However,
the trial judge found that William was at risk of
psychological harm from the mother, particularly when in her primary
is necessary then to consider the additional considerations dictated by
terms of the consideration in s 66C(3)(a), due to Willam's age, the trial
judge gave no weight to the view expressed by William
to Ms Hatton that he
would like to live with the
Section 66C(3)(b)
requires consideration to be given to the nature of a child's relationship with
each of the child's parents and
other people. The trial judge considered that
William had a close and loving relationship with his maternal grandparents, who
had considerable involvement in his life. As well, the trial judge did not
doubt that he had important relationships with the mother's
extended family. He
also thought that it was likely that William had positive relationships with his
paternal grandparents, and
the father's extended family, but these relationships
would be less strong compared to the maternal family because of the limited
William had spent with
Section 66C(3)(c)
requires consideration to be given to the extent to which each of the parents
has taken, or failed to take, opportunities
to participate in major life
decisions, to spend time with the child and communicate with the child.
trial judge considered that the mother had made most decisions about William's
major long‑term issues. However, he also
considered that the father had
done his best to spend time, and communicate, with the child. He outlined the
significant logistical
efforts involved in the father travelling from rural
South Australia to Perth to have access to William, and the costs involved in
The trial judge pointed out that in October 2023 the father had to return to
South Australia without spending time with William,
owing to the mother's
failure to facilitate handover, and the following month he cancelled his flight
and drove home from Adelaide
(five hours away) when William did not attend
school from where he was due to be
Section 66C(3)(da)
makes it an additional consideration to consider the extent to which each of the
child's parents has fulfilled,
or failed to fulfil, the parent's obligations to
maintain the child. The trial judge considered that the father's fulfilment of
his obligations to maintain William had been
'reasonable'.
additional consideration is the likely effect of any changes in the child's
circumstances, including the likely effect on
the child of separation from
either parent or another person with whom the child has been living (such as a
grandparent).
trial judge accepted the opinion of Mr De Rooster that it was likely
that William would become increasingly distressed and dysregulated,
and that he
would display other psycho‑emotional symptoms, if the parents continued to
behave in a similar manner towards each
other as had occurred, and if they
continued to place William in the middle of the
The trial judge also accepted the opinion of Ms Hatton that 'reversal of
care' orders were a drastic step which could have a profound
psychological and
emotional impact upon a 4‑year‑old
trial judge accepted that if William were to remain in Perth, he would continue
to attend the school where he appeared to be
thriving. If he were to move to
South Australia, it was unlikely that he would be able to attend the
kindergarten nominated by the
father, given the long waitlist. His Honour also
accepted that William had access to health professionals in Perth and that would
likely be more problematic in regional South
regard to the additional consideration in s 66C(3)(e), the trial judge said
that there were considerable practical difficulties
and expenses associated with
William having direct contact with both parents on a regular basis. He said
that return flights between
Adelaide and Perth could fluctuate between $1,200
and $2,000 per person, depending upon the time of year. Further, it would take
either Adelaide or Melbourne to reach an airport,
although a regional flight
could be purchased for between $200 to $500 per person.
additional consideration referred to in s 66C(3)(f) is the capacity of each
parent or any other relevant person (including a
grandparent or other relative)
to provide for the needs of the child, including emotional and intellectual
needs. As we have mentioned,
the trial judge found that the father was better
able to manage William's
The trial judge also commented that he believed that the
...is a person of insight particularly when it comes to understanding and
parenting [William]. I also believe that he has a more
balanced understanding
of [the mother] then she has of him.
trial judge also added that he considered that both the paternal and maternal
grandparents would be likely to be able to provide
for William's needs, except
that he was concerned that the maternal grandmother's antipathy towards the
father would compromise her
ability to provide for William's future emotional
66C(3)(g) provides that an additional consideration is the maturity, lifestyle
and background of the child and either of
the parents, and any other
characteristics of the child that the court thinks are relevant. In this regard
the trial judge noted
that William was 4¾ years old and in
kindergarten. On the basis of a teacher's report, the trial judge found that
a social and physically well‑coordinated child whose attention
other children seek out. He receives occupational therapy for
mild sensory
difficulties.
Section 66C(3)(i)
provides that an additional consideration is the attitude to the child, and to
the responsibilities of parenthood,
demonstrated by each of the parents. The
trial judge
Both parents clearly love their son and their attitude to him is a loving one.
Unfortunately, I consider [the mother] to be unable
to properly discharge her
responsibility as a parent to shield him from her negative attitude towards [the
father] and promote his
relationships with [the father] and his
only other additional considerations which drew substantive comment from the
trial judge are the ones set out in s 66C(3)(l)
and s 66C(3)(m). In
relation to s 66C(3)(l), the trial judge considered that it was obvious
that if he made 'reversal of care' orders,
then it would be necessary to make
interim orders given that there was insufficient evidence to enable him to
predict the adjustment
of William and his parents to such an
relation to s 66C(3)(m) and whether there was any other fact or
circumstance which the court thought to be relevant, the trial
I have no confidence that [the mother] will promote [William's] relationships
with [the father] and his family. Conversely I consider
that [the father] is
likely to promote [William's] relationships with [the mother] and her
making the observations which we have set out, the trial judge considered
whether the presumption that it is in the best interests
of the child for the
parents to have equal shared parental
responsibility
He considered that it had been. This is for the reasons which he expressed in
the following
I am comfortably satisfied that the conflict between the parties is intractable.
I accept the opinion of Ms Hatton expressed in her
second report that the
parties are disagreeable and inflexible and unable to effectively
co‑parent or even parallel parent.
An aspect of this conflict and
ineffective communication is the parties' inability to resolve such issues as
[William's] electronic
communication with [the father] and the attendance of
[the mother] at handovers. I consider that the parties are likely to continue
to be unable to effectively communicate.
In the circumstances I am more than satisfied it would not be in [William's]
best interests for the presumption of equal shared parental
responsibility to
trial judge then referred to the criticisms which the mother made of the father
including her description to Mr De Rooster that
the father was
'unhealthy', 'not well in his mind', 'not child focused' and 'paranoid'. He
also referred to the mother's physiological
anxiety reactions, hypervigilance
and paranoia, as recorded by her psychologist. The psychologist also noted that
the mother believed
that the father was 'messing with her trying to keep control
on her whereabouts' stemming from what was recorded to have been a 'difficult
and emotionally abusive relationship'. The mother's psychologist also recorded
that the mother 'can intellectually accept that [the
father] does not pose a
danger to her in the scenarios in public with other people around and that he
has never physically assaulted
her however on an emotional level [the mother]
holds rigid fears he will work his way into her life again' and 'appears to hold
catastrophic
fears for her son's safety and
well‑being'.
having referred to these matters, the trial judge accepted that contact had been
taking place with the father appropriately
since early
However, the trial judge was still concerned
(a) William had felt the need to apologise for spending time at the father's
(b) as recently as August 2024, William was still hitting and spitting at his
mother and screaming in her face for 30 to 45 minutes
at a time. The
trial judge considered that this behaviour likely resulted from the mother's
overprotective and permissive parenting,
and/or a feeling of frustration on the
part of William with his mother over her view of the father, or the mother
causing William's
loyalties to be
Notwithstanding
that the trial judge accepted that 'reversal of care' orders might result in
William becoming anxious, confused and
he explained his decision to make 'reversal of care' orders in the following
In my view, [the mother's] attitude towards [the father] is entrenched and
pervasive. No member of the maternal family appears able
to influence [the
mother] for the better. [The mother's] relationship with her father has been
troubled at times and he was kept
in the dark about the private investigator.
My impression of [the maternal grandmother] is that she shares her daughter's
of [the father] and is closely aligned with her. I do not believe that
[the mother] is able to provide [William] with a psychologically
environment. I do not think this is likely to improve by [William] living with
[the mother] and she continuing to have counselling
and [William] continuing to
have occupational therapy.
In my view, [the father] is able to provide [William] with a psychologically
healthy environment. I believe he and his family are
supportive.
I conclude it is in his best interests for [William] to live primarily with [the
father] and for [the father] to have sole parental
responsibility for
provided these reasons, the trial judge then commented upon some matters
relating to the transition of care for William from
the mother to the father.
trial judge appears to have been acutely aware that making 'reversal of care'
orders might well cause psychological impacts upon
William. The trial judge
specifically mentioned that he was 'likely to need psychological support to
successfully manage the transition'
to his father. The trial judge said that it
was important for the father to arrange for William to receive that
psychological support
well, the trial judge considered that it was necessary to continue to case
manage the transition of William's care from his mother
to his father, and to
case manage ongoing contact between William and his mother. The trial judge
said that contact between William
and his mother should depend upon satisfactory
transition by William, and both the mother and the father being in a position to
appropriately
manage handovers and spending time with
the trial judge's plan to carefully manage William's transition did not prove
possible, at least up until the point of the
stay application being decided,
because the mother made an application for the trial judge to recuse himself
from further involvement
in the case, upon the basis of bias. That prevented
the trial judge from having further involvement while he considered the
disqualification
application.
Section 66C ‑ summary of
considerations
may be seen from what has been set out above
(a) leaving aside the difficulties caused by the intractable differences between
the parents which affected William, the trial judge
did not consider questions
of family violence, abuse or neglect, as these had not occurred;
(b) the trial judge did not consider the views of William as to who William
would prefer to live with, as he was too young to express
any meaningful
(c) there was no issue of Aboriginal heritage or culture which needed to be
taken into account; and
(d) the trial judge did not consider that there was any risk of harm to William
from any sexualised behaviour of his cousins, or
from farm equipment in South
a matter of substance, the preceding discussion of the trial judge's reasons
discloses that, in considering the exercise of his
discretion to make parenting
orders, the trial judge focused upon:
(a) the relationship which existed between William and each of his parents, and
between William and his extended families;
(b) the contribution that each parent had made to William's upbringing;
(c) the parenting styles of each parent, and the ability to control or manage
William's behaviour; and
(d) the likely effect that each parent would have upon William's relationship
with the other
the risk of over‑simplification, the trial judge effectively made the
'reversal of care' orders because, even though each
parent 'clearly love[s]
he considered that:
(a) the mother's parenting style was overly permissive, which contributed to
William's own behaviours and meant that the mother was
unable to manage
William's behaviours, both at home and at handovers; and
(b) the mother's difficulties with the father (which were adopted by William's
maternal grandmother) meant that the mother (and the
maternal grandmother) would
prevent William having a good relationship with his father, but the father would
encourage a good relationship
between William and his
Appeal ‑ general observations
is the primary ground of appeal. It is drafted so that it extends over
three pages. It has four parts, each with multiple
Needless to say, this is not an ideal way of drafting a ground of appeal. It
represents a mixture of grounds of
appeal and extensive particulars of those
grounds (if not, effectively, supporting submissions). We will not set it out
but we will attempt to summarise it below.
one finding of fact is challenged in the appeal. The challenged factual finding
is that William's separation anxiety was mild
and was not a cause of his
dysregulated behaviour in the mother's care. This single finding is challenged
for the purposes of ground
3, and is the subject of the Review of Evidence
annexed to the appellant's submissions.
leaves many other factual findings by the trial judge intact. For example,
there is no challenge to the factual findings that
the disputation between the
parents was
intractable,
or that the mother had used access to William as a weapon in the interpersonal
conflict which she had with the
There was no challenge to the finding that William is at risk of psychological
harm from the mother particularly in her primary
Likewise, there is no dispute as to the facts regarding the difficulties which
occurred over the father having access to William,
or the problems of electronic
communication between William and the father.
alleges that the trial judge erred in law in determining that it was in the
child's best interests to order a 'reversal
of care' and relocation of the child
into the care of the father in South Australia for four reasons.
alleges a species of express error referred to in
House v The King
namely that the learned trial judge 'acted upon a wrong principle', although the
ground also invoked the notion that his Honour
'did not take into account some
material consideration' (sub‑grounds 1.3 and 1.4).
first basis for the alleged error of law (sub‑ground 1.1) is that the
trial judge failed to adequately evaluate the risk
to the child in ordering a
'reversal of care'. In effect, this sub‑ground alleges that the trial
judge ought to have assessed
the risk to William inherent in making 'reversal of
care' orders, and compared that risk with the risk to William of not having a
proper relationship with his father. However, it is not alleged that, had this
been done, the risk of harm to William in not having
a proper relationship with
his father was less than the risk of harm to William in making 'reversal of
care' orders.
second reason for the alleged error (sub‑ground 1.2) is that the
trial judge elevated his concern that the mother would
likely hamper the ongoing
father/son relationship over the benefit to William of having a meaningful
relationship with both of his
parents (which would not occur if the 'reversal of
care' orders were made).
third reason for the alleged error (sub‑ground 1.3) is that the trial
judge erred in not giving proper, genuine and realistic
consideration to how
William could maintain a meaningful relationship with both his parents, in
circumstances where the trial judge
had found that William had a meaningful
relationship with both his parents at the time judgment was given.
fourth reason for the alleged error (sub‑ground 1.4) is that the
trial judge failed to give proper, genuine and realistic
consideration to four
of the 'additional considerations' mentioned in s 66C(3). These
(a) how the close relationship between William and the maternal family,
especially the maternal grandparents, could be maintained
if the 'reversal of
care' orders were made;
(b) the likely effect of any changes in William's circumstances, including
separation from parents or other important people;
(c) how the 'reversal of care' orders would effectively make the father the
arbiter of any immediate contact between William and
the mother, despite the
relationship of the parents involving intractable conflict and ineffective
communication; and
(d) the practical difficulties and expense of the mother spending time with
William in South Australia, and whether that was appropriate
respective financial positions of the parties showed that the father had a much
higher income than the mother.
An incorrect latent assumption
is a latent assumption in the first three sub‑grounds. It is that the
'reversal of care' orders will lead to no meaningful
relationship between the
mother and William. However, that is certainly not what was intended by the
trial judge. In fact, he intended
the very opposite. As indicated, the trial
judge made the 'reversal of care' orders because he was of the view that the
more likely to encourage a good relationship between William and the
mother, compared to the mother facilitating a good relationship
between William
truth, the trial judge favoured a position which was most likely to lead to both
parents maintaining a meaningful relationship
with William, compared to only the
mother maintaining such a relationship with William. Of course, a choice had to
be made as to
which parent would be the primary carer, given that they were
resident on opposite sides of the country. Again, the trial judge
choice by reference to the parent (ie the father) who was, in his view,
most likely to facilitate meaningful relationships
between William and both of
criticism can be made of the trial judge's exercise of discretion to choose a
position which is most likely to facilitate a meaningful
relationship with both
parents over one which only facilitates a meaningful relationship with one
The assessment and balancing of risk (sub‑ground
submissions of the mother suggest that it was necessary for the trial judge to
assess the risk of harm to William through making
'reversal of care' orders,
compared to the risk of harm to William if the mother did not properly
facilitate an ongoing relationship
between William and his father. The mother
submits that the trial judge should have assessed whether there was a credible
harm to William involved in each choice and what orders could have been
made to reduce the risk of harm from each option. The mother
then submits that
the trial judge should have assessed which risk of harm was more likely.
the hearing of the appeal, this aspect of ground 1 was the appellant's
principal focus. In terms of
House v The King
error, this sub‑ground alleged that his Honour 'acted upon a wrong
principle'. At the hearing of the appeal, senior counsel
for the appellant
identified that error of principle in the following terms: 'in assessing what
was in the best interests of the
child [the learned trial judge] failed to
adequately evaluate and weigh (or consider) the competing risks to the
Those competing risks, as we have said, were identified as the likely
psychological harm of William being in the mother's primary
care as against the
risk associated with a reversal of
identified, as we will come to, the alleged error suggests a weighting error,
rather than an error of principle. So long as the
learned trial judge properly
identified and considered the relevant material considerations, however, the
evaluation of those considerations,
and the weight to be afforded to them, was a
matter for his Honour (subject to the result not being 'unreasonable or
plainly unjust').
returning to this point, a number of particular difficulties with the mother's
submissions on this sub‑ground may be
the submission depends, in part, upon the trial judge being required to consider
what orders could be made to ameliorate the
risk that the mother would not
facilitate an ongoing relationship between Willam and his father. However, the
trial judge specifically
... I have no confidence whatsoever that [the mother would now follow orders
imposed by the Court] given [the mother's] repeated
failures to comply with
previous orders, her fixed view of [the father] and the untrustworthiness of
much of her evidence.
is no appeal against this finding or against the correctness of any of the
underlying matters mentioned by the trial judge
which led to that finding.
next difficulty is that the mother effectively submits that the question of
balancing competing risks reduces to a question about
the risk of psychological
injury to William of remaining in the mother's care compared to the risk of
psychological injury to William
due to the 'reversal of care' orders being
is not a correct way to view the balancing exercise involved in exercising the
discretion. It is not a case of comparing two
countervailing risks which can be
quantified in a mathematical way. The exercise of the discretion involves
weighing a variety of
factors, many of which are not capable of precise
quantification or estimation. That is necessarily so, where matters which must
be considered concern the future and require a degree of evaluation and
prediction.
third difficulty with the submission is that the mother suggests that the trial
judge did not properly consider the risk of the
'reversal of care' orders
causing psychological harm to William.
trial judge specifically considered the evidence of the single independent
expert (Ms Hatton) on the question of disruptions
which may be caused by
'reversal of care' orders. He reproduced the following passage from the report
of Ms Hatton, which he said
A reversal of care is a drastic but sometimes necessary step. However, the
psychological and emotional impact on a 4‑year‑old
child can be
profound. Removal from a primary caregiver leading to anxiety, confusion, and a
sense of abandonment. This can foster
insecure attachment styles, making it
difficult for the child to trust adults and form future relationships.
Disruptions in care
can hinder the development of social skills and emotional
resilience, while chronic stress may negatively fracture cognitive functions
like problem‑solving, memory, and language. Sudden changes can undermine
the child's sense of safety and stability, with long‑term
effects on their
ability to form healthy relationships and maintain emotional stability later in
Subsequently,
the trial judge specifically repeated that he had accepted the evidence of
Ms Hatton that removing William from the
primary care of his mother might
result in William becoming anxious, confused and feeling abandoned. The trial
judge said that he
accepted the possibility that William's attachments and
developments might suffer if any transition was not properly
also provided an opinion that the disruption to William's emotional and
psychological wellbeing by reversing his care would
be too great at the relevant
time, given the progress the parties had
The trial judge did not specifically mention this opinion, but he obviously did
not accept it. That should be understood in the
context of his general
criticisms of Ms Hatton, and his finding that she had become an advocate
for the mother.
regard to the passages from the Reasons of the trial judge, we are satisfied
that he gave proper consideration to the evidence
before him of the risks of
making 'reversal of care' orders.
fourth difficulty with the mother's submissions on the balancing of risks
relates to the extent of the evidence about the risks
before the trial judge.
The evidence about the effect of 'reversal of care' orders before the trial
judge was framed in a very general
manner, and did not attempt to estimate or
quantify any particular level of risk to William, or to compare that risk with
of psychological harm of remaining in the primary care of the mother.
In these circumstances, it was not possible for the trial
judge to balance
particular risks which were disclosed by the evidence. The most that his Honour
could do was identify the possible
risks in general terms, and consider them as
best he could on the evidence.
submissions made by the mother that it was necessary only to take steps
'proportionate to the degree of risk', and that the 'reversal
of care' orders
were disproportionate to the
requires at least some evidence to assist in estimating or quantifying a 'degree
of risk'. That evidence was unavailable in respect
of the 'degree of risk'
related to the likely effect of the 'reversal of care' orders upon William.
mother submits that where William was spending time with the father in
accordance with interim parenting orders, enjoyed a meaningful
relationship with
him and had a meaningful relationship with the mother, it was not proportionate
to remove him from his primary
carer and effectively sever her relationship with
submission implicitly depends upon the likelihood of the mother continuing to
comply with court orders. As explained, that
is a matter of which the trial
judge was not satisfied and the finding by the trial judge in that respect has
challenged.
Moreover, the submission implicitly asserts that 'reversal of care' orders will
sever the mother's relationship with William. Again,
as we have explained, that
was not intended to
fifth difficulty with the mother's submissions on the balancing of risks is that
they set up a false dichotomy. They seek to compare
the risk of harm to William
of 'reversal of care' orders with the risk of harm to William of no ongoing
relationship with the father,
on the assumption that the only possible benefit
of such orders was to place that relationship on a more secure footing. In
that was only one factor that the trial judge considered in coming to
the conclusion that the orders should be made.
the mother makes submissions about the risk balancing exercise based upon cases
These are cases which are concerned about whether parenting orders should be
made allowing a parent accused of sexual misconduct
towards a child access to
that child. The framework for considering risk in that situation involves
contentious allegations of serious
criminal conduct. That involves matters
which do not arise in the context of assessing and balancing risk for the
purposes of making
other types of parenting order. Moreover, the historical
facts in the present case are not in dispute, save for the one issue over
whether William's separation anxiety was mild and was not a cause of his
dysregulated behaviour in the mother's care.
generally, in the terms in which the alleged error of principle was ultimately
expressed, in our view it cannot be said that
the learned trial judge did 'fail
to adequately evaluate and weigh (or consider) the competing risks to the
child'. Whether his
Honour specifically used the expression 'competing risks',
the learned trial judge's reasons, as a whole, reveal that this is precisely
what his Honour did. He identified the various risks and reached an overall
assessment of what was in the best interests of William.
No error of principle
is revealed.
all of these reasons, we do not consider that the first sub‑ground of
ground 1 is established.
Elevated concern that the mother would hamper the
father's relationship (sub‑ground 1.2)
sub‑ground asserts that the trial judge erred in determining that it was
in the William's best interests to make 'reversal
of care' orders by reason
The learned Judge fell into error by elevating his concern that the Mother's
feelings about the Father were likely to
hamper ongoing facilitation of the
father/son relationship
' (Reasons [326]) above the benefit to the Child
of having a meaningful relationship with both of the Child's parents; and
identifying
the need to protect the Child from potential harm
Subsection 66C(2) and 3A of the Act
(original emphasis)
'primary consideration' set out in s 66C(2)(a) is 'the benefit to the child
of having a meaningful relationship with both of
the child's parents'. In
considering this matter, the trial judge accepted that William had become
triangulated amidst the tension
of his parents' differences. The trial judge
accepted the evidence of Mr De Rooster that if the tension in the
relationship between
William's parents continued, William would become
increasingly distressed and show increased dysregulated and externalising
behaviours,
and/or some other psycho‑emotional
that context, the trial judge made the following comments, which are the basis
sub‑ground 1.2:
The outlook for [William] is a problematic one. I accept [the father's]
evidence that [William's] behaviour with him is not dysregulated.
However, and
as I have just referred to, [William's] behaviour when with [the mother] is
often dysregulated. I have no confidence
that her underlying attitudes towards
[the father] are susceptible of change. These have been made plain to
Ms Chadwick, Mr De Rooster
and Ms Hatton. I agree with the
submission made on behalf of [the father] that [William] is at risk of
psychological harm from [the
mother] particularly in her primary care.
I also consider it likely that [the mother's]
feelings about [the father] are likely to hamper ongoing facilitation of the
relationship just as they have done in the past.
consider that implementation of [the mother's] proposals for [William] to spend
weekend and holiday time are likely to
provide him with sufficient lived
experience to successfully counter his exposure to those fears and views.
(emphasis added)
that the trial judge had, in this passage, 'elevated' the consideration that a
child has a meaningful relationship with the father
to the status of an
overriding objective of a parenting order, contrary to what was said in
Jurchenko &
We do not read this passage as 'elevating' a consideration of the need to
facilitate the father/son relationship as a matter which
was above other
considerations. This passage identifies a risk of psychological harm to William
if the mother remains as William's
primary carer. The trial judge also
considers that this risk of psychological harm will not be overcome simply by
providing limited
access to the father for William. Both of those matters are
legitimate considerations, particularly where s 66C(2) provided (at
time) that the primary considerations in making a parenting order were the
benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship
with both parents, and
the need to protect the child from psychological harm from abuse, neglect or
family violence. We do not see
any analytical error contained in passage of the
trial judge's Reasons set out above.
is also no challenge to the primary factual basis for the passage. That is,
there is no challenge to the findings that:
(a) William is at risk of psychological harm from the mother, particularly in
her primary care; and
(b) it is likely that the mother's feelings about the father are likely to
hamper ongoing facilitation of the father/son relationship,
just as they have
done in the
do not consider that this sub‑ground has been
established.
No consideration of maintaining a meaningful
relationship with both parents (sub‑ground 1.3)
appellant alleges that the trial judge erred in law in determining that it was
in William's best interests to order a 'reversal
of care' by reason
In circumstances where the learned Judge found that the Child had a meaningful
relationship with both his parents (Reasons [320]
and [336]), the Judge erred in
not giving 'proper, genuine and realistic consideration' as to how the child
could maintain a meaningful
relationship with both his parents
Subsection 66C(2)(a))
a certain extent, this sub‑ground appears to repeat the complaint that the
trial judge did not consider whether appropriate
orders could be made which left
William in the primary care of the mother, but facilitated the relationship with
the father. We
have dealt with this issue previously.
we do not accept that the trial judge failed to consider in a proper, genuine
and realistic way, how to maintain a meaningful
relationship between William and
both of his parents. The trial judge expressly considered the nature of each
parent's relationship
He specifically concluded that William would benefit from having a meaningful
relationship with the mother 'if her physiological
anxiety reactions,
hypervigilance and paranoia'
The trial judge considered that it was necessary for each parent to promote the
relationship with the other
The trial judge made a finding that the father was capable of ensuring that a
relationship with the mother was maintained if the
'reversal of care' orders
were made. The trial judge proposed to case manage the transition contemplated
by the 'reversal of care'
orders, to ensure appropriate contact with the
Consequently,
it is apparent that the trial judge carefully considered the need to maintain a
meaningful relationship between William
and each of his parents, to the extent
that this was possible given the limitations which would arise through distance
and also through
the capacity of the mother to manage her feelings towards the
father. Whether an appeal court agrees or disagrees with the particular
conclusions reached by the trial judge is of no relevance to this
sub‑ground, which is only concerned with giving relevant
matters proper
consideration in the exercise of a judicial discretion.
these reasons, we do not consider that sub‑ground 1.3 is
established.
Failure to properly consider additional considerations
(sub‑ground 1.4)
appellant alleges that the trial judge erred in law in determining that it was
in William's best interests to order a 'reversal
of care', by reason that he
failed to give proper, genuine and realistic consideration to four of the
additional considerations listed
in s 66C(3).
is alleged that the trial judge failed to give proper consideration
(a) the close relationship between William and the maternal family, especially
the maternal grandparents with whom William lived,
and how this relationship
maintained;
(b) the likely effect of any changes in William's circumstances including
separation from his parents or other
(c) the effect of making an order which required the parties to agree about
William's time spent on communication arrangements, which
would make the father
the arbiter of the immediate contact between William and the mother;
(d) the practical difficulty and expense of William spending time with the
mother after relocation to South Australia; and how difficult
and/or expensive
it would be for the mother and the maternal family to obtain access in South
Australia, especially when viewed in
the context of the respective financial
positions of the
submissions which are made in support of this sub‑ground demonstrate that
each of the matters which have been identified
in the sub‑ground have been
considered by the trial judge. That should also be evident from the recitation
of matters considered
by the trial judge set out
substance, this ground is a challenge to the weight given by the trial judge to
various factors in the exercise of his discretion.
That is, the appellant says
that the trial judge did not give proper, genuine and realistic consideration to
various matters, because
the trial judge did not apply the weight to those
matters which would have been decisive in the outcome of the exercise of the
according to the appellant.
Shinohara &
Williams, Altobelli and Campton JJ observed
The weight or importance given to evidence in the exercise of discretion in
making parenting orders that promote the best interests
of children, or in
adjusting property so as to achieve justice and equity, is a matter
quintessentially for the primary judge. That
an appellate court might have
arrived at a different outcome by virtue of affording different weight to
various matters does not
justify the reversal of the decision of the primary
observations apply equally to the present case. It is unnecessary to go through
each individual part of the sub‑ground.
This only serves to confirm that
the trial judge did consider the various matters alleged in this
sub‑ground, and that the
essential contention is that he failed to give
those matters the decisive weight which the appellant alleges ought to have
In our view, there was no error by the trial judge upon the basis of
sub‑ground 1.4.
would also add that the mother appears to match each matter advanced in support
of this sub‑ground with the position on
the father's case, essentially in
an effort to show that the position of the appellant always cancelled out the
alternative position
of the father. For example, in relation to the logistical
difficulties for obtaining access, the appellant points out that the father
more easily obtain accommodation and transport within a capital city such as
Perth, compared to the mother who may experience
difficulties about that in a
rural South Australian
is a superficial attraction to this form of analysis, but it should be avoided.
That is because the exercise of the discretion
is a single matter, which
involves balancing many considerations. Some of these may be of greater weight
than others. In the present
case, the trial judge appears to have placed
significant weight upon the need to maintain a meaningful relationship between
and William, in a context where the trial judge considered that there
was no form of orders that could be made which the mother was
likely to observe.
Moreover, another factor of significant weight was the trial judge's view that
the mother could not constrain
her antipathy to the father, which would poison
the interactions between William and the father, and expose William to the risk
psychological harm. There are no 'cancelling' matters which may be advanced
by the mother in respect of those considerations.
in relation to the particular matter concerning the logistical difficulties and
costs for the mother of travelling to rural
South Australia for the purposes of
access visits, the mother contended that the trial judge failed to consider the
greater difficulty
for her to travel to a remote region and find a place to
stay, compared to the father (who was financially better off) to travel
and obtain accommodation.
the trial judge expressly considered the overall time and costs of travel
between the two
However, it does not appear to have been suggested by the mother at trial that
logistical considerations would mean that she would
be unable to see William if
the reversal of care orders were made. Neither was that position positively
advanced on the
The complaint was simply that there was no analysis by the trial judge of
whether the mother would be able to afford travel or obtain
accommodation in
South Australia. In our view, there was no error by the trial judge in not
considering whether the mother would
be able to travel to South Australia and
obtain accommodation there, when she did not positively advance that
Impact of delay
the mother disclaims that there is an appeal ground based upon the delay of
seven months between the trial and the
the mother contends that the delay is relevant. The mother submits that that
the delay prevented the trial judge from 'engaging
with the evidence and making
orders in the best interests of the
our view, given the lack of contest on appeal over the findings of primary fact,
the delay of seven months has not prejudiced
either party in the
fact‑finding process undertaken by the trial judge, or in considering the
best interests of the child.
If the mother considered that the trial judge had
made other factual findings which were unwarranted by the evidence, or ignored
particular evidence, we would have expected those matters to be raised as
grounds of appeal.
mother also submits that it should be inferred that in the period of seven
months between trial and the judgment, access between
William and the father
occurred adequately and without any contraventions of the court's orders. That
is because there was no contravention
application or complaint brought to the
court's attention about compliance with its orders and access by the father to
are not sure whether it is proper to draw that inference, particularly given the
history of the matter and non‑compliance
with the orders. In any event,
even if we were to draw that inference, we are unpersuaded about how far that
would take us. That
is because the existence of the pending judgment rather
alters the context in which the question about compliance with the court's
orders arises. We consider that it is different from the situation which may
exist after judgment has been given, because parties
would be sensitive to the
prospect of contravention given the application is being made in close proximity
before a judgment is given.
these reasons, and particularly where there is no ground of appeal directed to
the impact of delay, we do not consider that a
delay of seven months affects the
validity of the 'reversal of care' orders.
is in the following terms:
The order for the reversal of care of the Child to the Father and relocation of
the Child to South Australia, is 'unreasonable' and/or
'plainly unjust', and/or
'plainly wrong' in that the decision is not, based upon the facts, in the best
interests of the child pursuant
66C of the Act
. (original emphasis)
are eight matters upon which the mother relies to say that the decision to make
'reversal of care' orders was 'unreasonable',
'plainly unjust' or 'plainly
(a) the mother had always been William's primary carer;
(b) the mother had fostered the relationship between William and the father so
that it could be said that William had a meaningful
relationship with his father
whilst living in his mother's primary care ‑ despite whatever
the court saw as the mother's shortcomings;
(c) William had never spent more than three consecutive nights in his father's
(d) the mother had complied with orders (including facilitating time between the
father and child) in the period from early 2024
until presumably judgment the
following year (a period of over a year), and there was no evidence before the
court, nor could there
be, that the mother had done anything other than comply
with the orders in the seven months between hearing and judgment;
(e) it was not evident that the trial judge made any attempt to consider how to
ameliorate the risk to William if orders were made
for him to remain in the
mother's care;
(f) whilst acknowledging the possibly dire outcomes for the child in the short,
medium and long‑term, if he was removed from
his primary caregiver, the
trial judge made no comment or findings as to how that risk might be ameliorated
in the father's care;
(g) the trial judge failed to express how the transition should be properly
implemented. Instead, the trial judge made the father
the sole arbiter of the
timing of communication which the mother would have with William following the
immediate reversal of care
and relocation, and made no express orders for any
time or communication with the maternal family, including the maternal
grandparents
who William had also been living with at that time; and
(h) the primary judge failed to take into account the practical impediments in
making the orders for 'reversal of care', as those
impediments would apply to
the mother and the maternal grandparents or family in seeking to have contact
with William.
Nature of judicial review - unreasonable, plainly
unjust, plainly wrong
ground rightly acknowledges that a decision to make a parenting order is a
discretionary one, and can only be set aside upon
a limited basis. As already
mentioned, that is consistent with the High Court's decision in
Bondelmonte
Relevantly, to this ground, an appellant challenging such a decision must
demonstrate that the result is 'unreasonable' and/or 'plainly
unjust', and/or
'plainly wrong'.
converse of this principle is that an appeal court will not interfere where it
would have preferred a different result, unless
it can first conclude that the
decision which was actually made was based upon an error. This was elaborated
by Mason and Deane
If the questions involved lend themselves to differences of opinion which,
within a given range, are legitimate and reasonable answers
to the questions, it
would be wrong to allow a court of appeal to set aside a judgment at first
instance merely because there exists
just such a difference of opinion between
the judges on appeal and the judge at first instance. In conformity with the
of principled decision-making, it would be wrong to determine the
parties' rights by reference to a mere preference for a different
result over
that favoured by the judge at first instance, in the absence of error on his
part. According to our conception of the
appellate process, the existence of an
error, whether of law or fact, on the part of the court at first instance is an
indispensable
condition of a successful appeal.
considering this ground, the starting point is to appreciate what it means for a
parenting order to be 'unreasonable', 'plainly
unjust', or 'plainly wrong' in
the context of a case where there is a dispute over who should be the caregiver
for a child.
parenting order defines the caregiver for a child over an extended period of
childhood. It necessarily depends upon assessing
the qualities and abilities of
the caregiver during that entire period. Inevitably, this will involve a degree
of prediction based
upon past matters. It may involve an assessment of
intangible qualities, such as a caregiver's empathy and compassion, and whether
the caregiver will be able to extend these qualities to the child. In effect,
it involves selecting the best person or, combination
of people, for an ongoing
future role.
on these matters provides an insight as to why a trial judge will inevitably
have an advantage over an appeal court in
making a parenting order. As the
Court observed in
Bondelmonte v
Bondelmonte
, not only is overall assessment of the best interests of the
child an evaluative judgment, a great many of the relevant considerations,
relation to which the trial judge is required to make factual findings, are
themselves matters that involve value judgments.
challenge to a discretionary decision, such as in the present case, that it is
'unreasonable or plainly unjust' must proceed upon
the basis of those primary
factual findings and evaluative judgements. As we have said, save for the
challenge in ground 3, the
mother does not challenge any of those primary
factual findings in the present case.
Trial judge's decision
the trial judge effectively made the 'reversal of care' orders for two primary
reasons. First, the mother's parenting style was
overly permissive and meant
that she was unable to manage William's behaviours, both at home and at
On the other hand, the father was better able to manage William's
behaviours.
Secondly, the mother and the maternal grandmother were likely to prevent William
having a good relationship with his
whereas the father was likely to foster a good relationship between William and
has been no express challenge to the factual basis for these findings.
our view, the two matters which we have just described mean that it is not
possible to say that the decision of the trial judge
was unreasonable, plainly
unjust or plainly wrong. The capacity of a person to manage a child's
behaviours must be a very substantial
consideration in making a parenting order.
Moreover, the view that one parent is more likely to foster good relations with
is also significant. We consider that the weight which it is possible
to give to these matters means that the trial judge could
properly take the view
that they outweighed the eight matters referred to by the mother (even if they
are all accepted) in claiming
that the 'reversal of care' orders were
'unreasonable', 'plainly unjust', or 'plainly wrong'.
add to this that the trial judge had the benefit of seeing both the mother and
the father give evidence, and hearing directly
from the expert witnesses.
Consequently, we consider that the trial judge is in a superior position to this
court to assess the
respective capabilities of the mother and the father to
parent William and manage his behaviours, and to draw conclusions about whether
one parent would foster relationships with the other parent.
there was ultimately no challenge to the finding, one matter did cause us to
reflect upon the finding about the capability
of the father to better manage the
behaviour of William. This is the circumstance that, at the time of the trial,
the father had
not had the opportunity to parent William for any extended
period. That circumstance no doubt presented some difficulty for the
trial judge in assessing the father's greater capacity in that regard.
Nevertheless,
in our view, there is a sufficient factual basis for the trial judge's
conclusion about this matter. That is because
the trial judge found that the
cause of William's behaviours is the antipathy of the mother towards the
In these circumstances, if the father encourages a good relationship with the
mother, it should follow that William will not manifest
the behaviours when he
is with the father. That is in fact the finding of the trial
It supports the finding that the father would be better able to manage William's
behaviours.
these reasons, we do not consider that ground 2 is
established.
is in the following terms:
The learned Judge erred by finding as fact that the Child's separation anxiety
was mild and was not a cause of the Child's dysregulated
behaviour in the
Mother's care (Reasons [254], [256] and [368]).
[254] the trial judge discussed certain text messages between the mother and the
father concerning an access visit on 14 January
2023. Before the access
visit the mother sent a message to the father requesting him to allow William to
take certain soft toys
with him, as William was still experiencing separation
anxiety. After the access visit the father sent a message to the mother and
asked her to expand on the separation anxiety, because William had not seemed
upset at all. The trial judge said that he accepted
the father's evidence and
thought that it was 'likely that separation anxiety was not the cause of
[William's] behaviours' with the
mother. Although the trial judge did not at
that point say what he thought was the cause of William's behaviours with the
we presume that he was referring to the cause of William's behaviours
being the inability of the mother to disguise her feelings
towards the
[256] the trial judge discussed the separation anxiety experienced by William
upon attending pre‑kindergarten. He said:
[William] attended pre‑kindergarten in 2023 and [the teacher's] report
recorded that he was anxious to leave [the mother] at
first 'like most
three‑year‑old children'. A few times he asked for reassurance.
However, as soon as [the mother] left
the school [William] appeared happy and
settled and eager to play with the other children. After some weeks [William]
happily separated
from [the mother]. I doubt whether [William] ever suffered
from more than mild separation anxiety from [the mother].
[368] the trial judge said:
I am concerned that as recently as August 2024, [William] was still hitting and
spitting at [the mother] and screaming in her face
45 minutes at a time. I consider this behaviour likely resulted from [the
mother's] overprotective and permissive parenting
or [William] feeling
frustrated with her view of [the father] or from [the mother] causing his
loyalties to split or a combination
of those factors. I do not consider that
separation anxiety is responsible.
General observations
[368] demonstrates, the trial judge found that William's separation anxiety was
mild, because he was of the view that the behaviours
that the mother attributed
to separation anxiety were instead caused by the mother allowing the
difficulties which she had with the
father to become apparent to William, and
because William felt frustrated with her.
Consequently,
the ground of appeal is oblique, to say the least. Ideally, it should have
directly challenged the trial judge's finding
[The mother's] description of [William's] behaviours at home evidence a child in
turmoil over several years which, as hypothesised
by Mr De Rooster, I
consider is likely due to her conduct either by splitting [William's] loyalties
or [William] becoming frustrated
with her perceptions or parenting
finding at [321] builds upon prior comments of Mr De Rooster, which
the trial judge had
by allocating responsibility to the mother for the triangulation which affected
William's behaviour. The trial judge
I accept the evidence of Mr De Rooster that [William] has become
triangulated amidst his parents' tension. I also have no hesitation
accepting Mr De Rooster's view that:
... the post separation parenting tensions and family dynamics
have affected [William] in the past, is affecting him at present and
will affect
[William] in future if the parents do not change their behaviour and help
[William] to have a healthy functional and
balanced relationship with each
parent. If the parents continue to behave in a similar manner towards each
other and continue to
place [William] in the middle of their dispute [William]
will increasingly be distressed and show increased dysregulated and
externalising
behaviours and/or some other psycho‑emotional symptoms.
(footnotes omitted)
the whole purpose of ground 3 is to support the submission that the trial
judge was in error in attributing William's dysregulated
behaviours to the
parenting of William by the mother, or to the mother's own difficulties with and
perceptions of the father, and
should have attributed these behaviours to
separation anxiety. The mother
Further, in finding that the Child had no more than mild separation anxiety, the
primary Judge then attributed the Child's dysregulated
behaviours to the
'overprotective and permissive parenting' of the Child by the Mother (Reasons
[349] and [368]) and, finding that
his behaviour when with the Mother was 'often
dysregulated' (Reasons [326]) led him to the erroneous conclusion that the Child
[at] risk of psychological harm from the Mother particular in her primary
care (Reasons [326]).
truth, if this was the point of ground 3, there should have been a ground
of appeal directly asserting this error.
Nevertheless,
the submissions made by the mother and the supporting review of evidence, make
plain that there is an indirect challenge
to the trial judge's finding that the
mother caused William's behaviours because William became frustrated with her
conduct in attempting
to split his loyalties, or William became frustrated with
her perceptions of the father or her parenting style. We are prepared
with the case upon the basis that ground 3 includes the indirect challenge
that we have just summarised.
does not seem to be any doubt that William's behaviours evidenced emotional
dysregulation on his part. Consequently, evidence
of those observing these
behaviours is beside the point. The critical question posed by the mother is
whether this dysregulated
behaviour was caused by separation anxiety, or by the
mother's conduct and perceptions of the father. This is an expert
two experts who were engaged on this issue were Mr De Rooster and
Ms Hatton. Mr De Rooster was a clinical psychologist and was
engaged to provide reportable family therapy. Ms Hatton was a registered
psychologist appointed as a single expert witness. Ms
Alicia Keys, an
occupational therapist treating William, gave some evidence which the mother
submits shows that William exhibited
dysregulated behaviours when in the care of
the father.
our view, the evidence of both witnesses who were psychologists supports the
view that the mother caused or materially contributed
to William's behaviours
because he became frustrated with her conduct, or her perceptions of the father.
However, there is a nuance
William's separation anxiety or whether it operated independently of that
evidence of Mr De Rooster treated the question of separation anxiety
as distinct from whether frustration with the mother's perception
of the father
caused William's
behaviours.
This is consistent with the findings made by the trial judge.
the other hand, the single expert witness (Ms Eliza Hatton) lays the
foundation for the conclusion that the mother's distrust
of the father would be
a factor contributing to William's behaviours.
was asked a question in cross‑examination by counsel for the mother about
whether she was concerned that moving William
to 'overnight time' with the
father might generate 'emotional feedback' in William which affected the mother.
... [William] coming home dysregulated, allegedly, from overnight time and
sharing that dysregulation with his mum, who is his home
base and his safe
person, who ‑ so she's always going to receive any emotional
fallout from [William]. She's the first one
that is going to see that, because
she is his primary attachment. And what the two parts of this are, is that the
first part is
yes. [The mother] would then see that dysregulation, and if she
didn't have understanding of, I suppose, the ins and outs of all
separation anxiety‑type stuff, that's then compounded by her own distrust
and fear of the father. So then her concerns
than if, let's say, [the father] and [the mother] were still together, and [the
mother] had sent
[William] off to stay with a grandparent and came back
dysregulated. She would ‑ she might be more mindful to go,
some separation anxiety. He didn't like being away from me. He
wasn't ready'.
Yes? --- So her fear and her understanding of that dysregulation becomes
magnified, based on her own experience of [the father] or
the experience that
she has reported.
previously explained, the trial judge declined to place significant weight on
the opinions of
This is the subject of appeal ground 4. However, even if accepted, in our
view the evidence in the passage which we have set out
above is consistent with
the evidence of Mr De Rooster. The mother is unable to control her
reaction to William's 'emotional feedback'
when William returns from the father,
and she herself experiences magnified fear and dysregulation. It is then a
short step (taken
by Mr De Rooster) to conclude that this would
escalate William's own dysregulation.
analysis means that an indirect challenge to the finding of the trial judge that
the mother caused or materially contributed
to William's behaviours because he
became frustrated with her conduct, or her perceptions of the father, should
fail. Even the single
expert witness appears to accept that the mother had an
emotional reaction to William visiting his father.
Ms Hatton's explanation, the psychological mechanism by which the mother
causes or contributes to Williams's behaviours is related
to the initial
separation anxiety which William may feel. That is slightly different to
treating the separation anxiety as entirely
independent, and mild by
Nevertheless,
we do not regard this difference as being substantively relevant. In our view,
ground 3 should be dismissed. We are
strengthened in this conclusion,
having regard to our view that ground 3 should have directly challenged the
factual finding about
the mother causing or contributing to William's
dysregulated behaviours, rather than obliquely challenging whether the
anxiety experienced by William was
concerns the evidence of the single expert witness, Ms Hatton. It is in
the following terms:
The learned Judge erred in law in finding that the opinions of Ms Hatton,
the single expert, should not be accorded significant weight,
notwithstanding
that the learned Judge then, without explanation, relied upon aspects of her
trial judge provided a series of reasons as to why he considered that the
evidence of Ms Hatton should not be accorded significant
weight. These were
as follows:
(a) Ms Hatton initially said that she did not interview William a second
time for the purposes of her second report, as she did not
wish to further
involve him. However, this was incorrect, because she met with William for
30 minutes;
(b) in her first report, Ms Hatton stated that the mother 'presented as
being mindful of not wishing to denigrate the other party',
and that she
confirmed this in her oral evidence. However, it was evident from other parts
of the report, that the mother had denigrated
the father to
(c) Ms Hatton adversely commented upon the father by saying that he had no
or little insight into his own contribution to the conflict,
but did not make
any comment about the mother's level of insight about the same issue and her
contribution to the
(d) Ms Hatton's first report contained an incorrect statement about the
mother having given $120,000 to the father, but this not
being repaid. The
trial judge said that he was uncertain whether the error was due to a lie told
by the mother to Ms Hatton, or
whether Ms Hatton failed to accurately
record what she was told by the
(e) Ms Hatton insisted on providing an interpretation of the Personality
Assessment Inventory test provided to the father, notwithstanding
accepted that the father's defensiveness was so high as to invalidate the test
and mean that it was not scientifically correct
to rely upon those
(f) Ms Hatton reported that the father asserted that the mother was lying,
and then the father would use passive aggression in his
communications with the
mother. However, in her oral evidence Ms Hatton accepted that she had only
skim read the messages, and that
there were passive/aggressive communications
(g) Ms Hatton did not consider the effect of the mother unilaterally
suspending overnight visits by William to the father, contrary
to orders of the
court, when expressing the view that the mother was 'modest, passive and
(h) Ms Hatton expressed the view that the father demonstrated high levels
of entitlement, and applied the attitude of 'what goes
for him goes for [the
mother] in a tit for tat manner'. She also considered that the father needed to
have control of the situation.
However, Ms Hatton did not apparently
consider whether the unilateral changes which the mother made to the time spent
with the father, and which had been ordered by the court, itself
demonstrated high levels of entitlement on the mother's part and
her need to
(i) Ms Hatton did not address the multiple reasons why William might be
presenting with externalising behaviours, as detailed by
Mr De Rooster
in his report, apart from saying that William appeared to be impacted
emotionally by the ongoing parental conflict
separation.
trial judge concluded his analysis of Ms Hatton's reports by
In my view, Ms Hatton failed to properly assess [the mother's] views about
[the father] and her contribution to the parties' conflict
including her failure
to facilitate overnight time and its impact upon [the father]. I consider
Ms Hatton's reports reveal her to
have been an advocate for [the mother].
My view was strengthened by the manner in which she gave her oral evidence
particularly
when being cross‑examined by the solicitor for [the mother]
during which I consider Ms Hatton seemed unreasonably eager to
[the father].
written submissions of the mother in support of the appeal do not address any of
the detailed reasons provided by the trial judge
for declining to accord
Ms Hatton's opinions significant weight. Instead, the submissions made by
the mother simply assert that
Ms Hatton made 'appropriate concessions'
during the course of her oral evidence. The submissions also characterise the
giving evidence by Ms Hatton as
'straightforward'.
our view, it is insufficient to challenge the trial judge's conclusion about the
weight to be accorded to the evidence of Ms Hatton
simply by referring to
the manner in which it was delivered. The detailed reasons provided by the
trial judge objectively indicate
that Ms Hatton gave evidence which
appeared to be biased to favour the mother's position.
mother submits that giving weight to some aspects of the evidence of
Ms Hatton, such as her view that it is a drastic step to
make 'reversal of
is inconsistent with generally dismissing the weight to be accorded to her
our view it was open to the trial judge to accept the opinion of Ms Hatton
on matters which do not appear particularly controversial,
without affecting his
general view about the weight to be accorded to her evidence. It does not seem
to us much beyond commonsense
to say that a reversal of care for a
4‑year‑old child may be drastic, and cause profound psychological
and emotional
impact upon the child.
we do not think it is really a matter of significant expert opinion that 'the
parties are disagreeable and inflexible and
unable to effectively
co‑parent or even parallel
That would seem to be manifestly obvious, even to non‑expert judicial
officers. The fact that the trial judge referred to
this as part of the
opinions of Ms Hatton upon which he placed some reliance does not seem to
us to detract from the general point
which he makes that Ms Hatton was an
advocate for the mother.
mother submits that there is no explanation by the trial judge as to why he
rejected Ms Hatton's central hypothesis that William
was suffering from
separation anxiety and that the separation anxiety was causing his
dysregulation.
We have dealt with the interaction between separation anxiety and William's
dysregulation in relation to ground 3. We do not regard
it accurate to say
that it was Ms Hatton's central hypothesis that William was suffering from
separation anxiety which operated independently
from the actions of the mother
in causing William's dysregulation.
these reasons, we would dismiss ground 4.
ground 5, the mother alleges that the learned trial judge 'erred in failing
to give adequate reasons in relation to the issues
canvassed in Grounds 1
gravamen of this ground is contained in the following paragraphs from the
Appellant's Amended
Submissions:
When an analysis is performed of the Reasons, what cannot be found, to the
standard propounded by the authorities, is the reason
for the immediate reversal
of care and relocation of the Child, where the Child's relationship with his
Mother was to be all but
terminated.
By way of further example, what cannot be discerned from the Reasons is why the
risk identified by the single expert and adopted
by the Primary Judge is not
greater than the risk to the child remaining in the Mother's care. There is no
transparency around the
risk analysis (if indeed one was performed) why when
considering the additional and primary legislative considerations the outcome
arrived at was preferred.
our view, the reasons for the trial judge making the 'reversal of care' orders
is apparent from the detailed reasoning set out
and scrutinised above.
the extent that it may be complained that there is no explanation as to why the
reversal of care needed to take place and be implemented
on the day when orders
were made, we refer to Thomson P's previous judgment on the matter in which
he set out the reasoning of the
trial judge for adopting this
Essentially, it is because the distress and grief that would be experienced by
the mother and the maternal family would be obvious
to William, and they would
be unable to shield him from it. In those circumstances, the judge considered
that it was in the best
interests of William that the reversal of care orders
should be immediately implemented.
this required is that the father should pick William up from school on the
relevant day, and take him to South Australia. This
would be in accordance with
the expectation that William would hold, because the arrangement was that his
father should pick him
up from school and take him to South Australia for the
weekend. However, there would be no return for William in the same way as
previously occurred.
these reasons, we dismiss ground 5.
would dismiss the appeal in circumstances where we do not consider that any
ground has been
established.
certify that the preceding paragraph(s) comprise the reasons for decision of the
Supreme Court of Western Australia.
Associate to the Honourable
President Thomson
4 NOVEMBER 2025
Lloyd (a pseudonym) v
Dunne (a pseudonym)
[2025] FCWA 120
Dunne (a pseudonym) v
Lloyd (a pseudonym)
Dunne (a pseudonym) v
Lloyd (a pseudonym) [No 2]
[2025] WASCA
FCA (prior to 2024 Amendments).
FCA, Schedule 2 cl 14(2). For the purposes of that provision,
the 2024 Amendments amended s 66C.
Bondelmonte v
Bondelmonte
[2017] HCA 8
(2017) 259 CLR 662
House v The King
[1936] HCA 40
(1936) 55 CLR
House v The King
Bondelmonte
Reasons [26],
[137] ‑ [138].
[137] ‑ [154].
[155] ‑ [156].
Reasons [345],
Reasons [364].
[133] ‑ [135].
Reasons [242], [262] ‑ [263], [284],
[286] ‑ [287].
Reasons [224],
Reasons [249],
Reasons [214], [226] ‑ [227], [255], [265] - [266],
[268], [273], [275], [282] - [283], [286], [291]. See also
Reasons [198], [212], [216] ‑ [217], [219],
Reasons [315].
Reasons [318]. See also
[319] ‑ [362].
FCA s 66C(2)(a) (prior to 2024
Amendments).
[321] ‑ [322].
[337] ‑ [338].
[339] ‑ [340].
FCA s 66C(3)(d) (prior to 2024 Amendments).
FCA s 70A (prior to 2024 Amendments).
[363] ‑ [365].
[364] ‑ [365].
[370] ‑ [372].
Dunne (a pseudonym) v
Lloyd (a pseudonym) [No 2]
[2025] WASCA 122
Reasons [249],
WAB 202 (Appellant's Amended Case, Appellant's Amended Submissions
Affidavit of the single expert witness, Ms Hatton, dated 17 September
WAB 203 (Appellant's Amended Case, Appellant's Amended Submissions
WAB 203 (Appellant's Amended Case, Appellant's Amended Submissions
See [82] ‑ [83]
Stott & Holgar
[2017] FamCAFC 152
[37] ‑ [38].
[2022] FedCFamC1A 97
WAB 203 (Appellant's Amended Case, Appellant's Amended Submissions
Jurchenko &
[2014] FamCAFC 127
WAB 196 (Appellant's Amended Case, Apellant's Amended Grounds of Appeal
[319] ‑ [322].
FCA s 66C(3)(b) (prior to 2024 Amendments).
FCA s 66C(3)(d) (prior to 2024
Amendments).
FCA s 66C(3)(d) and (m) (prior to 2024
Amendments).
FCA s 66C(3)(e) (prior to 2024
Amendments).
See above [41], [45] ‑ [48],
Shinohara &
[2025] FedCFamC1A
WAB 209 (Appellant's Amended Case, Appellant's Amended Submissions
WAB 209 (Appellant's Amended Case, Appellant's Amended Submissions [52] ‑
WAB 210 (Appellant’s Amended Case, Appellant’s Amended Submissions
WAB 210 (Appellant’s Amended Case, Appellant’s Amended Submissions
WAB 210 (Appellant’s Amended Case, Appellant’s Amended Submissions
WAB 212 (Appellant’s Amended Case, Appellant’s Amended Submissions
Bondelmonte
Norbis v Norbis
[1986] HCA 17
(1986) 161 CLR 513
Reasons [317]. See also at [326],
Reasons [321], [326], [355], [362], [370]. See also [318],
Reasons [321]. The relevant passage is quoted at [37]
See Reasons
Reasons [325].
WAB 215 (Appellant’s Amended Case, Appellant’s Amended Submissions
GAB 731 ‑ 732 (Report of De Rooster dated 17 August
2024 at pp 6 ‑ 7, annexed to the Affidavit of De Rooster,
26 September
Trial transcript dated 11 October 2024,
[142] ‑ [143].
[151] ‑ [152].
WAB 215 ‑ 216 (Appellant’s Amended Case, Appellant's
Amended Submissions
[74] ‑ [75]).
WAB 216 (Appellant’s Amended Case, Appellant's Amended Submissions
[81] ‑ [82].
Dunne (a pseudonym) v
Lloyd (a pseudonym) [No 2]
[2025] WASCA 122
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (485 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter