URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WAIRC/2025/251.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:04:37
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Commission's Own Motion -v- (Not Applicable) [2025] WAIRC 251; (23 April 2025)
REVIEW OF THE PLASTER,
PLASTERGLASS AND CEMENT WORKERS' AWARD NO. A 29 OF 1989 PURSUANT TO
INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS ACT 1979
WESTERN AUSTRALIAN INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COMMISSION
SENIOR COMMISSIONER R
TUESDAY, 15 APRIL 2025
DELIVERED :
WEDNESDAY, 23 APRIL 2025
COMMISSION'S OWN MOTION
(NOT APPLICABLE)
Law (WA) – Commission’s own motion –
Section 40B(1)
Industrial Relations Act 1979
(WA) – Award variation – Plaster,
Plasterglass and Cement Workers' Award – To ensure award does not contain
that are less than statutory minimum wages – Removal of obsolete,
out of date and discriminatory provisions – Variations
to ensure award
facilitates efficient organisation and performance of work balanced with
fairness – Award varied
Legislation
Equal Opportunity Act 1984
Fair Work Act 2009
Industrial Relations Act 1979
Industrial Relations Legislation Amendment and Repeal Act 1995
Labour Relations Reform Act 2002
Minimum Conditions of Employment Act 1993
Public and Bank Holidays Act 1972
Award Varied
Representation:
Mr B Entrekin on behalf of the Hon. Minister for Industrial Relations
Meagher on behalf of the Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union of
Case(s) referred to in reasons:
Commission’s Own Motion v (Not Applicable)
[2024] WAIRC 00013
(2024) 104 WAIG 182
Commission’s Own Motion v (Not Applicable)
[2023] WAIRC 00836
(2023) 103 WAIG 1836
Termination, Change and Redundancy General Order
[2005] WAIRC 01715
(2005) 85 WAIG 1681
Reasons for Decision
Western Australian Industrial Relations
of its own motion,
initiated this matter for variation of the
Plaster, Plasterglass and Cement
No. A 29 of 1989
Relations Act 1979
). Section 40B allows the Commission
to vary an award for any one or more of the following purposes:
(a) to ensure that the award does not contain wages that are less
than the minimum award wage as ordered by the Commission under s
(b) to ensure that the award does not contain
conditions of employment that are less favourable than those provided by the
Minimum Conditions of Employment Act 1993
(c) to ensure that the award does not contain provisions that discriminate
against an employee on any ground on which discrimination
in work is unlawful
Equal Opportunity Act 1984
(d) to ensure that the award does not contain provisions that are obsolete or
need updating; and
(e) to ensure that the award is consistent with the facilitation of the
efficient organisation and performance of work according to
the needs of an
industry and enterprises within it, balanced with fairness to the employees in
the industry and enterprises.
of the Award’s provisions were outdated or obsolete, or were less
favourable than the MCE Act.
Commission provided notice of its intention to vary the Award to UnionsWA, the
Chamber of Commerce and Industry WA, the Australian
Resources and Energy
Employers Association, the Minister for Industrial Relations, the named employer
parties to the Award, the Association
of Wall and Ceiling Industries and the
Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy
of Workers (WA) as the
union party to the Award.
Commission then sought input from interested parties about the issues with the
Award, and the appropriate revisions to address
parties have had an opportunity to provide comments in relation to draft
variations which were circulated. Feedback was received
from the Minister but no
publication of the notice of proposed variations to the Award, pursuant to s
40B(2) of the IR Act, a hearing was convened
on 15 April 2025 for the purpose of
affording interested persons an opportunity to be heard in relation to those
proposed variations.
Minister and the Union both confirmed their support for the proposed variations
with some further minor variations for accuracy
and clarity. The variations were
not opposed.
Accordingly,
I have determined that it is appropriate to vary the Award in accordance with
the Schedule to these reasons.
the following paragraphs, I set out briefly the rationale for the variations
contained in the Schedule.
Clause 1 – Title
year and number of the Award has been removed from its title consistent with
contemporary practice.
Clause 2 – Arrangement
clauses have been grouped together under functional headings in a standard
arrangements clause.
Clause 3 – Scope
referencing has been updated in line with other
amendments.
Clause 5 – Term
clause is deleted as it is obsolete.
Definitions
clause is renumbered from clause 6.
(6) was not strictly a definitional clause but prohibited junior employees being
engaged in labouring work in a factory
unless agreed by the Union. This
prohibition has been deleted as it is likely to have the effect of removing most
junior employees
from coverage under the Award if they are doing labouring
duties. It may also be discriminatory in its effect.
– Contract of Employment
clause is renumbered from clause 7 and renamed from ‘Contract of
Definitions
for Full time, Part time and Casual employees are incorporated.
New Clause 6A – Flexible Working Arrangement
new clause makes provision for flexible working arrangement requests consistent
with the provisions of the MCE Act.
New Clause 7 –
Termination of Employment
new clause has been updated to make it easier to follow and for consistency with
the National Employment Standards of the
Fair Work Act 2009
), Division 3 of Part 6-3 which requires non-national system employers
(including employers in the state industrial relations system)
to provide notice
of termination or payment in lieu to employees.
Trainee Casters
clause is renumbered from clause 7 and renamed to remove the word
‘Adult’ from the title.
clause contained an outdated scheme for accreditation and examination of
trainees, with reference to the now defunct Commonwealth
Reconstruction Training
Scheme. Its provisions were likely contrary to legislation which prohibits
discrimination on the grounds
new clause incorporates the terms of the National Training Wage provisions of
Joinery and Building Trades Award 2020
made under the FW Act.
allowance for a caster training a trainee has been amended to be expressed as a
percentage of the caster’s minimum weekly
wage, consistent with the
percentage the allowance represented when the Award was made in
Clause 12 – Hours
clause is renumbered from clause 10. Reference to the 38 hour week commencing
from January 1984 and May 1990 have been removed
as obsolete. Similarly,
provisions about the implementation of a 38 hour week have been removed.
(5)(b) which permitted an employer and group of employees to extend the span of
has been removed as it is contrary to the
principles discussed in
Commission’s Own Motion v (Not
Applicable)
[2023] WAIRC 00836
(2023) 103 WAIG
Clause 13 – Overtime
clause is renumbered from clause 12.
allowance provisions have been updated to incorporate the meal allowance rate in
Joinery and Building Trades Award 2020
, which is updated annually
pursuant to the Fair Work Commission’s Annual Wage Review.
is now made to the MCE Act provisions about working reasonable overtime.
Clause 14 – Wages
clause is renumbered from clause 13.
column indicating the ‘Arbitrated Safety Net’ adjustment component
of the rates of pay has been removed as it is unnecessary.
rates of pay that were less than the statutory minimum have been increased by
expressing the rates as a percentage of the Award’s
full time adult
Labourers’ rate. The percentages are those set out in s 13 of the MCE Act.
This will ensure that the rates
remain consistent with the statutory minimum
rates for junior employees.
loading has been increased from 20% to 25% for consistency with the MCE
Clause 15 – Special Rates and Provisions
clause is renumbered from clause 14.
hand allowances have been converted to be expressed as a percentage of a Plaster
Caster’s weekly rate to maintain its
relative value without the Award
being varied.
Clause 16 – Payment of Wages
clause is renumbered from clause 15. The clause has been simplified for clarity.
(4) which permitted an employer and majority of employees to agree an
alternative method of payment has been removed as
it is contrary to the
principles discussed in
Commission’s Own Motion v (Not
Applicable)
[2023] WAIRC 00836
(2023) 103 WAIG 1836.
(8) headed ‘Pay Packet Details’ has been replaced with reference to
the provisions of the IR Act about pay
Clause 17 –
Supported Wage System
clause replaces former clause 16 ‘Under-Rate Employees’. It has been
updated to reflect the current standard clause
for Supported Wage System
Clause 18 – Superannuation
clause replaces clause 28. Most of its provisions were out-of-date and
inconsistent with Commonwealth superannuation legislation.
The clause has been
updated to mirror the provisions of the IR Act.
– Personal Leave & Clause 20 – Bereavement Leave
clauses replace clause 17 ‘Absence Through Sickness or Bereavement.’
The existing clause was inconsistent with the
MCE Act in several respects.
leave and bereavement leave are now contained in separate clauses, incorporating
the respective provisions of the MCE Act.
to ‘sick pay’ and ‘sick leave’ have been replaced with
‘personal leave’, reflecting
the provisions of the MCE Act.
New Clause 21 – Family and Domestic Violence Leave
is a new clause. The Award made no provision for family and domestic violence
clause refers to the provisions of the FW Act for paid family and domestic
violence leave which apply to state system employers
and employees, as well as
relevant provisions of the MCE Act.
Clause 22 – Public
Holidays & Clause 23 – Annual Leave
clauses replace clause 18 ‘Holidays and Annual Leave’.
main changes of note are:
(a) ‘Foundation Day’ has been
changed to ‘Western Australia Day’. ‘Easter Sunday’ has
been included
as a public holiday in the Award, reflecting the provisions of s
3(2) and s 3(3) of the
Public and Bank Holidays Act 1972
(b) Sub-clause 22(1)(c) stipulates that Easter Sunday is not substituted for
another day because it falls on a weekend.
(c) Sub-clause 22(1)(b) reflects the MCE Act entitlement to be absent from
work on a public holiday without loss of pay, and the balance
of the clause
mirrors the provisions of the MCE Act concerning employer requests of employees
to work on public holidays.
23 provides for annual leave in accordance with the MCE Act, but retains the
Award’s existing provisions about leave
subclause 18(6) has been deleted as the MCE Act now deals with the interaction
of public holidays and annual leave.
Clause 24 – Long
Service Leave
clause has been renumbered from clause 25 and the now obsolete reference to the
long service leave provisions published in the
Industrial Gazette has been
replaced with reference to the
Long Service Leave Act 1958
Clause 25 – Parental Leave
Award made no provision for parental leave, but clause 27 provided for
‘Maternity Leave’.
varied clause refers to parental leave being provided in accordance with the FW
Act. State system employers and employees are
subject to the provisions of
Division 5 of Part 2-2 of the FW Act.
Clause 26 – Right
of Entry and Inspection of Records
clause is renumbered and renamed from clause 19 ‘Records’.
new provisions align with the conditions regarding right of entry and inspection
of records contained in the IR Act.
Clause 27 – Posting
Copy of Award and Union Notices
clause is renumbered from clause 20. The liberty to apply provision has been
removed on the basis that it is unnecessary. Parties
have the right to apply to
vary the Award.
Clause 28 – Dispute Resolution Procedure
clause is renumbered from clause 26 ‘Grievance and Disputes
Procedure.’ It has been renamed ‘Dispute Resolution
to reflect the terminology used in the IR Act. No other variations are made.
Clause 30 – Redundancy
redundancy pay provisions have been expanded to include redundancy pay for
employees with more than 5 years’ continuous
service, consistent with the
Termination, Change and Redundancy General
[2005] WAIRC 01715
; (2005) 85 WAIG 1681.
5 has been amended to ensure that the alternative employment provisions are
consistent with the
Termination, Change and Redundancy General
(7) reduced the redundancy pay of employees who receive a benefit from a
superannuation scheme. This has been deleted as
it is inconsistent with the
Termination, Change and Redundancy General Order
Cross-referencing
to other clauses has been updated.
Schedule 2 – Respondents
Schedule has been updated to show accurate respondent names and indicate where a
respondent to the Award is deregistered or deceased.
21 titled ‘Representative Interviewing Employees’ is deleted. It was
inconsistent with the provisions of the IR
Act as it limited rights of entry to
premises where an employer employs union members.
22 ‘Board of Reference’ is deleted as being obsolete, given no other
clause requires a Board of Reference to make
any determination.
31 ‘Enterprise Agreement’ is deleted. This clause is the same type
as the clause I considered in APPL 27 of 2023:
Commission’s Own
Motion v (Not Applicable)
[2024] WAIRC 00013
(2024) 104 WAIG 182.
clause is contrary to the scheme of the IR Act and invalid. It has, therefore,
been deleted.
Appendix titled ‘Resolution of Disputes Requirements’ is deleted.
This Appendix is outdated, being inserted in the
Award in 1996 pursuant to the
Industrial Relations Legislation Amendment and Repeal Act 1995
to comply with what was then contained in s 49B of the IR Act, which was
repealed pursuant to
Labour Relations Reform Act 2002
The information in the Appendix is therefore outdated and does not reflect the
current statutory provisions regarding inspection
of records.
clauses have been renumbered as a result of the deletion or addition of other
Percentages
expressed in words have been expressed numerically and with symbols.
measurements have been changed to metric measurements.
language has been removed.
Date of effect of variations
variations contained in the schedule to these reasons are to take effect from
the date of the order.
Current Award
Plaster, Plasterglass and Cement Workers' Award No. A 29 of
Plaster, Plasterglass and Cement Workers’ Award
This award shall be known as the Plaster, Plasterglass and Cement Workers'
Award No. A 29 of 1989 and replaces Award No. 11 of 1969
and Award No. 6 of
1962 as amended.
This award shall be known as the
Plaster, Plasterglass and Cement
Workers’ Award.
Insert the following as a heading before clause 1
– APPLICATION AND OPERATION
1B. - MINIMUM ADULT AWARD WAGE
(1) No employee aged 21 or more shall be paid less than the minimum adult
award wage unless otherwise provided by this clause.
(2) The minimum adult award wage for full-time employees aged 21 or more
working under an award that provides for a 38-hour week is
$918.60 per
The minimum adult award wage for full-time employees aged 21 or more
working under awards that provide for other than a 38-hour week
is calculated as
follows: divide $918.60 by 38 and multiply by the number of ordinary hours
prescribed for a full-time employee under
The minimum adult award wage is payable from the beginning of the first pay
period commencing on or after 1 July 2024.
(3) The minimum adult award wage is deemed to include all State Wage order
adjustments from State Wage Case decisions.
(4) Unless otherwise provided in this clause adults aged 21 or more
employed as casuals, part-time employees or piece workers or employees
remunerated wholly on the basis of payment by results, shall not be paid less
than pro rata the minimum adult award wage
according to the hours worked.
(5) Employees under the age of 21 shall be paid no less than the wage
determined by applying the percentage prescribed in the junior
rates provision
in this award (if applicable) to the minimum adult award wage, provided that no
employee shall be paid less than
any applicable minimum rate of pay prescribed
Minimum Conditions of Employment Act 1993
(6) The minimum adult award wage shall not apply to apprentices, employees
engaged on traineeships or government approved work placement
programs or
employed under the Commonwealth Government Supported Wage System or to other
categories of employees who by prescription
are paid less than the minimum award
rate, provided that no employee shall be paid less than any applicable minimum
rate of pay prescribed
Minimum Conditions of Employment Act
(7) Liberty to apply is reserved in relation to any special category of
employees not included here or otherwise in relation to the
application of the
minimum adult award wage.
(8) Subject to this clause the minimum adult award wage shall –
(a) Apply to all work in ordinary hours.
(b) Apply to the calculation of overtime and all other penalty rates,
superannuation, payments during any period of paid leave and
for all purposes of
this award.
(9) Minimum Adult Award Wage
The rates of pay in this award include the minimum weekly wage for
employees aged 21 or more payable under the 2024 State Wage order.
Any increase
arising from the insertion of the minimum wage will be offset against any
equivalent amount in rates of pay received
by employees whose wages and
conditions of employment are regulated by this award which are above the wage
rates prescribed in the
award. Such above award payments include wages payable
pursuant to enterprise agreements, consent awards or award variations to give
effect to enterprise agreements and over award arrangements. Absorption which is
contrary to the terms of an agreement is not required.
Increases under previous State Wage Case Principles or under the current
Statement of Principles, excepting those resulting from enterprise
agreements,
are not to be used to offset the minimum wage.
(10) Adult Apprentices
(a) Notwithstanding the provisions of this clause, the minimum adult
apprentice wage for a fulltime apprentice aged 21 years or more
working under an
award that provides for a 38-hour week is $762.80 per week.
(b) The minimum adult apprentice wage for a full-time apprentice aged 21
years or more working under an award that provides for other
than a 38- hour
week is calculated as follows: divide $762.80 by 38 and multiply by the number
of ordinary hours prescribed for a
full-time apprentice under the award.
(c) The minimum adult apprentice wage is payable from the beginning of the
first pay period commencing on or after 1 July 2024.
(d) Adult apprentices aged 21 years or more employed on a part-time basis
shall not be paid less than pro rata the minimum adult apprentice
wage according
to the hours worked.
(e) The rates paid in the paragraphs above to an apprentice 21 years of age
or more are payable on superannuation and during any period
of paid leave
prescribed by this award.
(f) Where in this award an additional rate is expressed as a percentage,
fraction or multiple of the ordinary rate of pay, it shall
be calculated upon
the rate prescribed in this award for the actual year of apprenticeship.
NO VARIATIONS
2. - ARRANGEMENT
1B. Minimum Adult Award Wage
2. Arrangement
6. Definitions
7. Adult Trainee
8. Contract of Service
9. Breakdowns
12. Overtime
14. Special Rates
and Provisions
15. Payment of Wages
16. Under Rate
17. Absence Through Sickness or Bereavement
18. Holidays and
Annual Leave
19. Records
20. Posting Copy of Award and Union
21. Representative Interviewing Employees
22. Board of
23. Junior Employees
24. Apprentices
25. Long Service
26. Grievance and Disputes Procedure
27. Maternity
28. Superannuation
29. Introduction of
30. Redundancy
31. Enterprise Agreement
Appendix - Resolution of Disputes Requirements
Schedule 1 - Parties to
Schedule 2 - Respondents
2. - ARRANGEMENT
PART 1 – APPLICATION AND OPERATION
1B. Minimum Adult
2. Arrangement
5. Definitions
PART 2 – CONTRACT OF EMPLOYMENT
6. Contract of
6A. Flexible Working Arrangement Requests
7. Termination of
8. Trainee Casters
10. Apprentices
11. Breakdowns
PART 3 – HOURS OF WORK
13. Overtime
PART 4 – RATES OF PAY AND ALLOWANCES
15. Special
Rates and Provisions
16. Payment of Wages
17. Supported Wage
18. Superannuation
PART 5 – LEAVE
19. Personal Leave
20. Bereavement
21. Family and Domestic Violence Leave
23. Annual Leave
24. Long Service Leave
25. Parental
PART 6 – OTHER
26. Right of Entry and Inspection of Records
27. Posting Copy of Award and Union Notices
28. Dispute Resolution
29. Introduction of Change
30. Redundancy
Schedule 1 – Parties to the Award
Schedule 2 –
Respondents
This Award shall apply to employees (except those employed on any work
"on-site" in connection with the erection, repair, renovation,
maintenance,
ornamental or demolition of buildings or structures) engaged in the industries
carried out by the respondents and employed
in the classifications referred to
in Clause 13. – Wages hereof.
This Award shall apply to employees (except those employed on any work
"on-site" in connection with the erection, repair, renovation,
maintenance,
ornamental or demolition of buildings or structures) engaged in the industries
carried out by the respondents and employed
in the classifications referred to
in Clause 14. – Wages hereof.
This Award shall have effect over the whole of the State of Western
NO VARIATIONS
The term of this award shall be for a period of three years from the
beginning of the first pay period commencing on or after the
date hereof.
CLAUSE DELETED
6. - DEFINITIONS
(1) "Operative Fibrous Employee", "Operative Plasterglass Employee" or
"Manufactured Cement Goods Employee" means an employee engaged
(a) architectural modelling;
(b) the manufacture of architectural ornaments of fibrous plaster,
plasterglass plaster or cement;
(c) the manufacture of fibrous plasterglass goods or portable articles of
reinforced cement or concrete, cement pressed work, baths,
wash tubs, troughs,
sinks, pillars, ornaments, and other miscellaneous goods, including floor beams,
partition blocks, lintels and
acoustic tiles (but excluding cement roofing
(d) any phase or phases of items (a) to (c) inclusive.
(2) A "Modeller" is defined as an employee who prepares the ground work or
who makes models and/or moulds, whether of gelatine, plaster,
wax, plasterglass
cement or fibreglass, or other suitable materials.
(3) A "Fibrous Plaster Caster" is defined as an employee who prepares the
benches or moulds for casting, prepares and applies plaster
face gauges (whether
for fibrous plaster boards, moulding, or other fibrous plaster products),
prepares and applies plaster back
gauges, places reinforcement into position,
imbeds the reinforcement either by hand, or with rollers, rules off the sheet,
the sheet back, cleans the bench or mould rules, removes the
manufactured article from bench or mould and places same in drying area.
his/her working area, tools and appurtenances in a clean and workable condition
and transfers plaster into the bin in accordance
with subclause (7) of this
(4) "Labourers" may be employed on all or any of the following work,
(a) filling of plaster bins, water troughs and fibre bins;
(b) removing from benches or moulds fibrous plaster products, placing same
in drying areas, changing moulds with the assistance of
casters when
(c) maintaining appurtenances such as tubs, troughs, bins, drains, etc. in
a clean and workable condition;
(d) maintaining floor in a clean condition;
(e) removing fibrous plaster products from drying areas into stores;
(f) carting plaster
(5) Except as provided in subclause (4) hereof, labourers shall not perform
any operation which is the duty of a caster.
(6) Junior employees shall not be employed on labourers' duties in any
factory in which labourers are employed on the work set out
in subclause (4)
hereof, except such juniors as may be agreed upon between the union and the
employer from time to time.
(7) Carting plaster: For the purpose of the schedules to this award the
term "carting plaster" shall not include the work of transferring
plaster into
the bin, from stacks adjacent to the bin nor the cartage of the gauge from the
bin to the table. A stack shall be considered
adjacent to the bin if it is
within a radius of twelve feet from the bin.
5. - DEFINITIONS
(1) “Operative Fibrous Employee”, “Operative Plasterglass
Employee” or “Manufactured Cement Goods Employee”
employee engaged in -
(a) architectural modelling;
(b) the manufacture of architectural ornaments of fibrous plaster,
plasterglass plaster or cement;
(c) the manufacture of fibrous plasterglass goods or portable articles of
reinforced cement or concrete, cement pressed work, baths,
wash tubs, troughs,
sinks, pillars, ornaments, and other miscellaneous goods, including floor beams,
partition blocks, lintels and
acoustic tiles (but excluding cement roofing
(d) any phase or phases of items (a) to (c) inclusive.
(2) A “Modeller” is defined as an employee who prepares the
ground work or who makes models and/or moulds, whether of
gelatine, plaster,
wax, plasterglass cement or fibreglass, or other suitable materials.
(3) A “Fibrous Plaster Caster” is defined as an employee who
prepares the benches or moulds for casting, prepares and
applies plaster face
gauges (whether for fibrous plaster boards, moulding, or other fibrous plaster
products), prepares and applies
plaster back gauges, places reinforcement into
position, imbeds the reinforcement either by hand, or with rollers, rules off
sheet, trowels the sheet back, cleans the bench or mould rules, removes the
manufactured article from bench or mould and places same
in drying area. Keeps
their working area, tools and appurtenances in a clean and workable condition
and transfers plaster into the
bin in accordance with subclause (6) of this
(4) “Labourers” may be employed on all or any of the following
work, namely:-
(a) filling of plaster bins, water troughs and fibre bins;
(b) removing from benches or moulds fibrous plaster products, placing same
in drying areas, changing moulds with the assistance of
casters when
(c) maintaining appurtenances such as tubs, troughs, bins, drains, etc. in
a clean and workable condition;
(d) maintaining floor in a clean condition;
(e) removing fibrous plaster products from drying areas into stores;
(f) carting plaster
(5) Except as provided in subclause (4) hereof, labourers shall not perform
any operation which is the duty of a caster.
(6) Carting plaster: For the purpose of the schedules to this award the
term “carting plaster” shall not include the work
of transferring
plaster into the bin, from stacks adjacent to the bin nor the cartage of the
gauge from the bin to the table. A stack
shall be considered adjacent to the bin
if it is within a radius of 3.7 m from the bin.
8. - CONTRACT OF SERVICE
(1) Except in the case of casual employees, the contract of service shall
be weekly and shall be terminable by one week's notice on
either side or by the
payment or forfeiture of one week's pay as the case may be.
(2) In the case of a casual employee the contract of service shall be
hourly and shall be terminable by one hour's notice on either
side or by the
payment or forfeiture of one hour's pay as the case may be.
(3) An employer may at any time dismiss an employee for misconduct.
(4) Payment may be deducted for any period that an employee is absent from
work during the ordinary working hours in any establishment.
6.- CONTRACT OF EMPLOYMENT
(1) An employer may engage an employee on either a full-time, part-time or
casual basis subject to the terms of this award.
(2) At the time of the engagement the employer will inform each employee of
the category of their employment, in particular, whether
they are to be
full-time, part-time or casual.
(3) A “full time” employee is engaged to work an average of 38
hours per week on an ongoing basis. An employee not specifically
engaged as a
part-time or casual is a full-time employee for the purposes of this
(4) A “part time” employee is an employee who is engaged to
work less than an average of 38 hours per week on an ongoing
basis and works a
regular number of ordinary hours each week.
(5) A “casual employee” is an employee who is engaged and paid
as such, applying
Industrial Relations Act 1979
casual employee is paid by the hour. A casual employee may only be employed for
a period of less than one week.
Insert the following as a heading before clause 6 ‘Contract of
Employment’:
– CONTRACT OF EMPLOYMENT
Insert the following as a new clause before clause 7 ‘Termination of
Employment’:
6A. - FLEXIBLE WORKING ARRANGEMENT REQUESTS
Employees may make a request for a flexible working arrangement in
accordance with s 39F and s 39G of the
Minimum Conditions of Employment Act
(WA). Any such request must be dealt with and determined in accordance
Minimum Conditions of Employment Act 1993
7. - TERMINATION OF EMPLOYMENT
Termination by the Employer
(1) In order to terminate the employment of a full time or part time
employee the employer must give the employee the following notice
Period of continuous service with the employer
Minimum Period of Notice
Not more than 1 year
At least 1 week
More than 1 year but less than 3 years
At least 2 weeks
More than 3 years but less than
At least 3 weeks
More than 5 years
At least 4 weeks
(2) An employee who at the time of being given notice is over 45 years of
age and who at the date of termination has completed two
years’ continuous
service with the employer, is entitled to one week’s notice in addition to
the notice prescribed in
clause 7(1).
(3) Payment in lieu of the notice prescribed in clause 7(1) and (2) must be
made if the prescribed notice period is not given. Provided
that employment may
be terminated by part of the period of notice specified and part payment in
(4) The period of notice in this subclause does not apply to those
employees who are exempt from receiving notice under Subdivision
A of Division
Fair Work Act 2009
(Cth), as amended from time to
(5) For the purpose of this clause an employee’s continuity of
service has the same meaning as prescribed in
Fair Work Act
Termination by the Employee
(6) Except in the case of a pieceworker or a casual employee an employee
may terminate the employment by giving one week’s notice.
Termination of Casual Employment
(7) Casual employment may be terminated by either party with one
hours’ notice.
Dismissal for Misconduct
(8) Nothing in this clause shall prevent an employer from terminating the
employment of an employee at any time for misconduct.
7. - ADULT TRAINEE CASTERS
Where juniors are not available for employment as casters, adult trainee
casters may be employed on the following terms:-
(1) The period of training shall be one year; provided that if, in the
opinion of the examiners a trainee reaches 100 per cent proficiency
expiration of one year, his/her period of training may be reduced accordingly.
Provided further, the examiners shall have
power to extend the period of
training in special circumstances where the trainee has not reached the full
proficiency.
(2) The combined number of trainee and junior casters employed by the
employer shall not exceed the number of adult casters employed.
(3) The employer shall notify the union of the engagement of a trainee
within fourteen days of the engagement.
(4) A caster responsible for the training of a trainee under this clause
shall be paid $2.90 per week extra whilst so engaged.
(5) A trainee shall be allocated to a caster for three-monthly periods. No
trainee shall be allocated to a junior or a person receiving
training under the
Commonwealth Reconstruction Training Scheme.
(6) One examiner shall be appointed by the union and one by the employers
for the purposes of examining trainees.
(7) A syllabus of training shall be prepared by the examiners and employers
shall provide training in accordance with such syllabus.
(8) Examinations shall be conducted quarterly except where a trainee or
employer requests an examination earlier than three months
from the previous
examination.
(9) The examiners shall assess the proficiency of trainees and fix the
percentage of the total wage prescribed for a plaster caster
in Clause 13. -
Wages which shall be paid to a trainee in accordance with paragraph (f) of
subclause (1) of the said clause.
(10) The examiners shall report to the Industrial Registrar the result of
each examination and The Construction, Forestry, Mining
and Energy Union of
Workers and the Association of Wall and Ceiling Contractors of WA (Inc.) shall
be supplied with a copy thereof.
(11) In the event of a disagreement between the examiners on any matter
within their jurisdiction, the matter shall be referred to
the Registrar whose
decision shall be final.
(12) Nothing in this clause shall apply to trainees employed under the
Commonwealth Reconstruction Training Scheme.
8 . - TRAINEE CASTERS
(1) The minimum rates of pay and conditions of employment applicable to
trainees will be those set out in Schedule E - National Training
Wage of the
Joinery and Building Trades Award 2020
as amended from time to time.
Provided that any reference to “this award” in Schedule E to the
Joinery and Building Trades Award 2020
is to be read as referring to the
Plaster, Plasterglass and Cement Workers’ Award
Joinery and Building Trades Award 2020
is a modern award
that applies to employers and employees in the national industrial relations
system. The rates of pay for trainees
are usually adjusted from 1 July each
(2) A caster responsible for the training of a trainee under this clause
shall be paid an additional 0.6% of a Plaster Caster’s
wage per week
whilst so engaged.
23. - JUNIOR EMPLOYEES
(1) Junior Employees may only be employed in the Fibrous Plaster Casting
and Cement branches of the industry in the proportion of
one junior to one adult
(2) One junior only shall be employed on the teasing machine.
(3) Junior employees, upon being engaged, shall furnish the employer with a
certificate showing the following particulars –
(a) name in full;
(b) age and date of birth;
(c) name of each previous employer;
(d) length of service with each previous employer.
(4) No employee shall have any claim for additional wages in the event of
his/her age or length of service with another employer being
wrongly stated on
this certificate and he/she alone shall be guilty of breach of this award.
(1) The provisions of this clause do not apply to employees engaged in the
Plaster Mill industry.
9. - JUNIOR EMPLOYEES
(1) Junior Employees may only be employed in the Fibrous Plaster Casting
and Cement branches of the industry in the proportion of
one junior to one adult
(2) One junior only shall be employed on the teasing machine.
(3) Junior employees, upon being engaged, shall furnish the employer with a
certificate showing the following particulars –
(a) name in full;
(b) age and date of birth;
(c) name of each previous employer;
(d) length of service with each previous employer.
(4) No employee shall have any claim for additional wages in the event of
their age or length of service with another employer being
wrongly stated on
this certificate and they alone shall be guilty of breach of this award.
(5) The provisions of this clause do not apply to employees engaged in the
Plaster Mill industry.
24. - APPRENTICES
(1) Apprentices to the Modelling Branch of the fibrous plaster trade may be
taken in the ratio of one apprentice to every two or fraction
of two (the
fraction being not less than one) tradespersons and shall not be taken in excess
of that ratio.
(2) Liberty to apply is reserved to either party to vary the provisions of
this clause.
10. - APPRENTICES
Apprentices to the Modelling Branch of the fibrous plaster trade may be
taken in the ratio of one apprentice to every two or fraction
of two (the
fraction being not less than one) tradespersons and shall not be taken in excess
of that ratio.
9. - BREAKDOWNS
The employer shall be entitled to deduct payment for any day or portion of
a day upon which the employee cannot be usefully employed
because of any strike
by the union or unions affiliated with it or by any other association or union
or through the breakdown of
the employer's machinery or any stoppage of work by
any cause which the employer cannot reasonably prevent.
RENUMBERED AS CLAUSE 11
Insert the following as a heading before clause 12
– HOURS OF WORK
10. - HOURS
(1) Hours of Work:
(a) The ordinary working hours shall be 38 per week to operate from the
beginning of the first pay period commencing on or after January
provided that for employees employed up until the date of this award pursuant to
the Plaster Mill Employees Award No. 6
of 1962 shall have ordinary working hours
of 38 per week from the first pay period commencing on or after 1st May
(b) Subject to the provisions of this subclause and subclauses (2) -
Implementation of 38 Hour Week - (3) - Procedures for In-house
Discussions; the
ordinary hours of work shall be an average of 38 per week to be worked on one of
the following bases.
(i) 38 hours within a work cycle not exceeding seven consecutive days;
(ii) 76 hours within a work cycle not exceeding fourteen consecutive days;
(iii) 114 hours within a work cycle not exceeding twenty-one consecutive
(iv) 152 hours within a work cycle not exceeding twenty-eight consecutive
(c) The ordinary hours of work may be worked on any or all days of the
week, Monday to Friday, inclusive, and except in the case of
shift employees,
shall be worked between the hours of 6.00am to 6.00pm with an interval of not
less than thirty minutes or more than
sixty minutes for lunch.
(d) The ordinary hours of work shall not exceed 10 hours on any day.
Provided that in any arrangement of ordinary working hours, where such
ordinary hours are to exceed 8 hours on any day, the arrangement
of hours shall
be subject to agreement between the employer and the majority of employees in
the employer's premises or section or
sections concerned.
(e) (i) In establishments where shift work is performed, subject to the
provisions of subclause (5) of Varied Starting Times, such
shift work hours
shall commence not earlier than 7.00am and shall finish not later than 12.00
midnight. Provided that where shifts
are worked, an interval of not less than
thirty minutes shall be allowed as a meal break.
(ii) Subject to the provisions of subclause (2) - Implementation of 38 Hour
Week and subclause (3) - Procedures for In-house discussions,
the ordinary hours
of shift employees shall average 38 per week (inclusive of crib time) and shall
not exceed 152 hours in twenty-eight
consecutive days.
(iii) Provided that in any arrangement of ordinary working hours, where
such ordinary hours are to exceed eight hours on any day,
the arrangement of
hours shall be subject to agreement between the employer and the majority of
employees in the employer's premises
or section or sections concerned.
(iv) When an employee is engaged on afternoon shift he/she shall be
entitled to be paid at the rate of 15 per cent in addition to
prescribed.
(2) Implementation of 38 Hour Week:
(a) Except as provided in paragraph (c) hereof, the method of
implementation of the 38 hour week may be any one of the following:-
(i) by employees working less than 8 ordinary hours each day; or
(ii) by employees working less than 8 ordinary hours on one or
more days each week; or
(iii) by fixing one day of ordinary working hours on which all employees
will be off duty during a particular four week cycle; or
(iv) by rostering employees off duty on various days of the week during a
particular four week cycle so that each employee has one
day of ordinary working
hours off duty during that cycle; or
(v) Where any rostered day off duty falls on a Holiday as prescribed in
Clause 18. - Holidays and Annual Leave, the next working day
shall be taken in
lieu unless an alternate day in that four week cycle or the next is
(b) An assessment should be made as to which method of implementation best
suits each employer and the proposal shall be discussed
with the employees
concerned, the objective being to reach agreement on the method of
implementation.
(c) Different methods of implementation of a 38 hour week may apply to
various sections or establishments of the one employer.
(d) Notice of Days Off Duty:
Except as provided in paragraph (e) hereof, in cases where, by virtue of
the arrangement of his/her ordinary working hours, an employee,
in accordance
with sub-paragraphs (iii) and (v) of paragraph (a) hereof, is entitled to a day
off duty during his/her four week cycle,
such employee shall be advised by the
employer at least four weeks in advance of the day he/she is to take off
(e) (i) An employer, with the agreement of the majority of employees
concerned, may substitute the day an employee is to take off
in accordance with
subparagraphs (iii) and (v) of paragraph (a) hereof, for another day in the case
of a breakdown in machinery or
a failure or shortage of electric power or some
other emergency situation.
(ii) An employer and employee may by agreement substitute the day the
employee is to take off for another day.
(3) Procedure for In-House Discussions:
(a) Procedures shall be established for in-house discussions, the objective
being to agree on the method of implementing a 38 hour
week in accordance with
subclauses (1) - Hours of Work and (3) - Implementation of 38 Hour Week of this
clause and shall entail an
objective review of current practices to establish
where improvements can be made and implemented.
(b) The procedures should make suggestions as to the recording of
understandings reached and methods of communicating agreements and
understandings to all employees, including the overcoming of language
difficulties.
(c) The procedures should allow for the monitoring of agreements and
understandings reached inhouse.
(d) In cases where agreement cannot be reached in-house in the first
instance or where problems arise after initial agreements or
understandings have
been achieved in-house, a formal monitoring procedure shall apply. The basic
steps in this procedure for settling
such a problem are as follows –
(i) Consultation shall take place within the particular establishment
(ii) If it is unable to be resolved at establishment level, the matter
shall be referred to the State Secretary of the union (or unions)
concerned or
his/her deputy, at which level a conference of the parties shall be convened
without delay.
(iii) In the absence of agreement either party may refer the matter to the
Western Australian Industrial Commission.
(4) an employee shall not be prohibited nor discouraged by his/her
employer, nor by any leading hand or foreperson acting for the
employer, from
having a "cup of tea" (which expression includes any suitable beverage, together
with something to eat) at a convenient
time once during each morning work
Provided that such a "cup of tea" is taken at a suitable place (where
flasks and cribs may be safely left) designated by the employer
particular employee or group of employees or, if no such place be designated,
then at the nearest such suitable place to
the place where the employee in
question reasonably believes when he/she commences work for the morning that
he/she will be working
at about the time he/she customarily has such "cup of
Provided further that work is not unduly interfered with and that there is
no organised stoppage of work for the purpose of having
the "cup of tea" except
with the consent of the employer.
(5) (a) The ordinary hours of work may, at the option of the
employer, be varied within a span of hours between 6.00am
and 6.00pm and
the working time shall then begin to run from the time so fixed, by the
employer, with a consequential adjustment
to the meal cessation period.
(b) Subject to agreement between the employer and an employee or a group of
employees, or the workforce, at a particular location,
the span of hours
prescribed by paragraph (a) hereof he/she maybe extended, to any agreed time,
earlier than 6.00am.
12. - HOURS
Hours of Work:
(a) The ordinary working hours shall be 38 per week.
(b) The ordinary hours of work shall be worked on one of the following
(i) 38 hours within a work cycle not exceeding seven consecutive days;
(ii) 76 hours within a work cycle not exceeding fourteen consecutive days;
(iii) 114 hours within a work cycle not exceeding twenty- one consecutive
(iv) 152 hours within a work cycle not exceeding twenty- eight consecutive
(c) The ordinary hours of work may be worked on any or all days of the
week, Monday to Friday, inclusive, and except in the case of
shift employees,
shall be worked between the hours of 6.00am to 6.00pm with an interval of not
less than thirty minutes or more than
sixty minutes for lunch.
(d) The ordinary hours of work shall not exceed 10 hours on any day.
Provided that in any arrangement of ordinary working hours, where such
ordinary hours are to exceed 8 hours on any day, the arrangement
of hours shall
be subject to agreement between the employer and the majority of employees in
the employer’s premises or section
or sections concerned.
(e) (i) In establishments where shift work is performed, such shift work
hours shall commence not earlier than 7.00am and shall
finish not later than
12.00 midnight. Provided that where shifts are worked, an interval of not less
than thirty minutes shall be
allowed as a meal break.
(ii) The ordinary hours of shift employees shall average 38 per week
(inclusive of crib time) and shall not exceed 152 hours in twenty-eight
consecutive days.
(iii) Provided that in any arrangement of ordinary working hours, where
such ordinary hours are to exceed eight hours on any day,
the arrangement of
hours shall be subject to agreement between the employer and the majority of
employees in the employer's premises
or section or sections concerned.
(iv) When an employee is engaged on afternoon shift they shall be entitled
to be paid at the rate of 15% in addition to the rates
prescribed.
(2) An employee shall not be prohibited nor discouraged by their employer,
nor by any leading hand or foreperson acting for the employer,
from having a 10
minute morning rest break at a convenient time once during each morning work
Provided that such a morning rest break is taken at a suitable place (where
flasks and cribs may be safely left) designated by the
employer for any
particular employee or group of employees or, if no such place be designated,
then at the nearest such suitable
place to the place where the employee in
question reasonably believes when they commence work for the morning that they
will be working
at about the time they customarily have such morning rest break,
Provided further that work is not unduly interfered with and that there is
no organised stoppage of work for the purpose of having
the morning rest break
except with the consent of the employer.
(3) The ordinary hours of work may, at the option of the employer, be
varied within a span of hours between 6.00am and 6.00pm and
the working time
shall then begin to run from the time so fixed, by the employer, with a
consequential adjustment to the meal cessation
(4) (a) If the ordinary hours of duty in a workplace provide for rostered
days off, an employee shall be advised by the employer at
least four weeks in
advance of the day they are to take off duty.
(b) An employer, with the agreement of the majority of employees concerned,
may substitute an employee’s rostered day off for
another day in the case
of a breakdown in machinery or a failure or shortage of electric power or some
other emergency situation.
(c) An employer and employee may agree to substitute the employee’s
rostered day off for another day.
(d) Where any rostered day off duty falls on a public holiday, the next
working day shall be taken in lieu, unless an alternate day
is agreed between
the employer and employee.
12. - OVERTIME
(1) All work performed outside the normal limits of the hours of labour
shall be paid for at the rate of time and a half for the first
two hours and
double time thereafter, provided an employee who commences at or after midnight
shall be paid double time until 6.00am
the following morning.
Subject to the provisions of subclause (3) of this clause, for the purpose
of this subclause, the normal limits of the hours of labour
shall be ascertained
by reference to the time of commencement and time of finishing generally
observed in regard to the employee
in question for the particular job on which
he/she is engaged.
(2) Any employee who is called upon to continue working for more than two
hours beyond his/her usual ceasing time shall be provided
with any meal required
or shall be paid an allowance of $7.30 in lieu thereof.
Provided that this subclause shall not apply to any employee who was
advised on the previous day that he/she would be required to
work such overtime,
nor to any employee who can conveniently return home for a meal.
(3) Any employee who has left the premises at which he/she is employed and
is recalled to work after the usual ceasing time for less
than one hour shall
receive payment for one hour at overtime rates.
(4) If an employee is required to work during the recognised meal period so
that the commencement of the meal period is postponed
for more than half an
hour, that employee shall receive payment at double time rates until he/she gets
his/her meal.
(5) Subject to the preceding subclause, if an employee who is required to
work during the recognised meal period does not in consequence
obtain during the
shift the full continuous meal period, or loses any portion of the meal period,
he/she shall be paid at double
time rates for the period not obtained or any
portion lost.
(6) The expression "recognised meal period" means the period customarily
observed as the meal period between fixed times on the job,
or at the works, as
the case may be, except where the time of commencement of the customary period
is altered by mutual consent of
the employer and the employees on a job to suit
the convenience of the employees or the building proprietor, in which case the
times shall be the basis of any rights under the preceding subclauses
(4) and (5).
(7) Notwithstanding anything contained herein -
(a) An employer may require any employee to work reasonable overtime and
such employee shall work the overtime in accordance with
such requirement.
(b) An organisation, party to this award, and/or an employee or employees
covered by this award, shall not in any way, whether directly
or indirectly, be
a party to or concerned in any ban, limitation or restriction upon the working
of overtime in accordance with (a)
13. - OVERTIME
(1) All work performed outside the ordinary hours of work shall be paid for
at the rate of time and a half for the first two hours
and double time
thereafter, provided an employee who commences at or after midnight shall be
paid double time until 6.00am the following
(2) Any employee who is called upon to continue working for more than two
hours beyond their usual ceasing time shall be provided
with any meal required
or shall be paid an allowance equal to the amount provided for in Clause 21.4(c)
Joinery and Building Trades Award 2020
Joinery and Building Trades Award 2020
is a modern award
that applies to employers and employees in the national industrial relations
system. The meal allowance contained
in Clause 21.4(c) of the
Joinery and
Building Trades Award 2020
is usually adjusted from 1 July each year.
Provided that this subclause shall not apply to any employee who was
advised on the previous day that they would be required to work
such overtime,
nor to any employee who can conveniently return home for a meal.
(3) Any employee who has left the premises at which they are employed and
is recalled to work after the usual ceasing time for less
than one hour shall
receive payment for one hour at overtime rates.
(4) If an employee is required to work during the recognised meal period so
that the commencement of the meal period is postponed
for more than half an
hour, that employee shall receive payment at double time rates until they get
their meal.
(5) Subject to the preceding subclause, if an employee who is required to
work during the recognised meal period does not in consequence
obtain during the
shift the full continuous meal period, or loses any portion of the meal period,
they shall be paid at double time
rates for the period not obtained or any
portion lost.
(6) The expression “recognised meal period” means the period
customarily observed as the meal period between fixed times
on the job, or at
the works, as the case may be, except where the time of commencement of the
customary period is altered by mutual
consent of the employer and the employees
on a job to suit the convenience of the employees or the building proprietor, in
case the altered times shall be the basis of any rights under the
preceding subclauses (4) and (5).
(7) Notwithstanding anything contained herein -
(a) An employer may require any employee to work reasonable overtime
consistent with the requirements of section 9B of the
Minimum Conditions of
Employment Act 1993
(b) An organisation, party to this award, and/or an employee or employees
covered by this award, shall not in any way, whether directly
or indirectly, be
a party to or concerned in any ban, limitation or restriction upon the working
of overtime in accordance with (a)
Insert the following as a heading before clause 14
– RATES OF PAY AND ALLOWANCES
13. - WAGES
Wage Per Week$
Arbitrated Safety Net$
Total Wage Per
Tool Allowance
Plaster Caster
Plaster Caster (Mechanical)
Cement employee
Trainee Casters – up to 40 per cent proficiency
Thereafter, such percentage of the plaster caster’s total wage as is
assessed in accordance with subclause (9) of Clause 7.
– Adult Trainee
Wage Per Week$
Arbitrated Safety Net$
Total Wage Per
Plant Operator
Front End Loader
Fork Lift Driver
Junior Employees Under 21 years of age
Under 20 years of age
Under 19 years of age
(3) Apprentice Modellers –
Four Year Term
Second year
Fourth year
N.B. The above percentages are of both the adult wage and the tool
(4) A “Casual Employee” being a person who is engaged or
employed for a period of less than one week shall be paid for
the time so
engaged at the rate of 20 per cent in addition to the rates prescribed herein.
Provided that this shall not apply to
an employee who serves his/her contract of
service or who is dismissed for misconduct.
(5) The rates of pay in this award include the arbitrated safety net
adjustment payable under the June 1998 State Wage Case Decision.
arbitrated safety net adjustment shall be offset against any equivalent amount
in rates of pay received by employees whose
wages and conditions of employment
are regulated by this award which are above the wage rates prescribed in the
award. Such above
award payments include wages payable pursuant to enterprise
agreements, consent awards or award variations to give effect to enterprise
agreements and over award arrangements. Absorption which is contrary to the
terms of an agreement is not required.
Increases made under previous State Wage Principles or under the current
Statement of Principles, excepting those resulting from enterprise
agreements,
are not to be used to offset arbitrated safety net adjustments.
Further the rates of pay in this award include the $12 per week or $10 per
week arbitrated safety net adjustments payable from the
beginning of the first
pay period on or after 1
August, 1999.
The rates of pay in this award include arbitrated safety net adjustments
available since December 1993, under the Arbitrated Safety
Net Adjustment
These arbitrated safety net adjustments may be offset against any
equivalent amount in the rate of pay received by employees since
1 November 1991
above the rate prescribed in the Award, except where such absorption is contrary
to the terms of an industrial agreement.
Increases in rates of pay otherwise made under the State Wage Case
Principles, excepting those resulting from enterprise agreements,
are not to be
used to offset arbitrated safety net adjustments.
14. - WAGES
(a) Modeller
Tool Allowance
(b) Plaster Caster
(c) Plaster Caster (Mechanical)
(d) Labourers
(e) Cement Employee
(f) Plant Operator
(i) Front End Loader
(j) Fork Lift Driver
Junior Employees Under 21 years of age
% of a Labourers’ wage*
20 years of age
19 years of age
Under 19 years of age
*Rounded to the nearest 10 cents.
Apprentice Modellers -
Four Year Term
% of a Modeller’s wage
Second year
Fourth year
Note 1: The above percentages are of both the adult wages and the tool
Note 2: Adult apprentices aged 21 years or over must receive the minimum
adult apprentice wage outlined in Clause 1B, or the above
percentage of the
Modeller’s Wage, whichever is the greater.
(4) A “Casual Employee” shall be paid for the time so engaged
at the rate of 25% in addition to the rates prescribed herein.
14. - SPECIAL RATES AND PROVISIONS
(1) Leading Hands: An employee placed in charge for not less than one day
Not less than three (3) and not more than ten (10)
other tradeperson
More than ten (10) and not more than twenty (20) other
tradeperson
More than twenty (20) other tradeperson
The rates herein prescribed shall be deemed to form part of the
ordinary rate of wage of the employees concerned for all purposes
Where the leading hand works under the supervision of a foreperson or of
the employer for the major portion of the day, the extra
rates set out in this
subclause shall be halved.
(2) The employer shall provide at lunch time on each job, boiling water for
the use of all employees.
(3) Protection of Tools: The employer shall, where practicable, provide a
place on each job for the safekeeping of the employees’
tools when not in
(4) Change Room: The employer shall, where practicable, provide and
maintain in a cleanly condition –
(a) on each job a proper change room where the employee may change his/her
clothes, and such place shall not be used for storing lime,
cement, or other
similar materials;
(b) separate locker accommodation, fitted with a suitable lock, for each
employee employed in or about the factory or shop for the
safekeeping of the
employees’ clothes and effects;
(c) suitable heating facilities for the drying of wet clothes of employees
employed on casting.
(5) Changing Time: At the factory, five minutes be allowed to employees who
desire to change their clothes, but no employee shall
leave the factory before
the proper time for ceasing work.
(6) Gloves for Cement Concrete Employees: Cement concrete employees shall
be supplied with suitable gloves.
15. - SPECIAL RATES AND PROVISIONS
(1) All employees required to work on any Sunday shall be paid double time
rate for all time worked on any such day.
(2) Leading Hands: An employee placed in charge of other tradespersons for
not less than one day shall be paid the following additional
amounts per week
% of a Plaster Caster’s weekly wage
Not less than 3 and not more than 10 other tradepersons
More than 10 and not more than 20 other tradepersons
More than 20 other tradepersons
The rates herein prescribed shall be deemed to form part of the ordinary
rate of wage of the employees concerned for all purposes
of this Award.
Where the leading hand works under the supervision of a foreperson or of
the employer for the major portion of the day, the extra
rates set out in this
subclause shall be halved.
(3) The employer shall provide at lunch time on each job, boiling water for
the use of all employees.
(4) Protection of Tools:
The employer shall, where practicable, provide a place on each job for the
safekeeping of the employees’ tools when not in use.
(5) Change Room:
The employer shall, where practicable, provide and maintain in a cleanly
condition -
(a) on each job a proper change room where the employee may change their
clothes, and such place shall not be used for storing lime,
cement, or other
similar materials;
(b) separate locker accommodation, fitted with a suitable lock, for each
employee employed in or about the factory or shop for the
safekeeping of the
employees’ clothes and effects;
(c) suitable heating facilities for the drying of wet clothes of employees
employed on casting.
(6) Changing Time:
At the factory, five minutes be allowed to employees who desire to change
their clothes, but no employee shall leave the factory before
the proper time
for ceasing work.
(7) Gloves for Cement Concrete Employees:
Cement concrete employees shall be supplied with suitable gloves.
15. - PAYMENT OF WAGES
(1) Subject to subclause (2) of this clause, from the beginning of the
first pay period commencing on or after 1 st May, 1984 wages
shall be paid as
(a) Actual 38 ordinary hours
In the case of an employee whose ordinary hours of work are arranged in
accordance with subparagraph (i) or (ii) of paragraph (a)
of subclause (2)
– Implementation of 38 Hour Week – of Clause 10. – Hours so
that he/she works 38 ordinary hours
each week, wages shall be paid weekly
according to the actual ordinary hours worked each week.
(b) Average of 38 ordinary hours
Subject to subclauses (2) and (3) of this clause, in the case of an
employee whose ordinary hours of work are arranged in accordance
subparagraphs (iii) or (iv) of paragraph (a) of subclause (2) –
Implementation of 38 Hour Week – of Clause 10. –
Hours so that
he/she works an average of 38 ordinary hours each week during a particular four
week cycle, wages shall be paid weekly
according to a weekly average of ordinary
hours worked even though more or less than 38 ordinary hours may be worked in
any particular
week of the four week cycle.
(2) For employees employed up until the date of this award pursuant to the
Plaster Mill Employees Award No. 6 of 1962, the provisions
of this clause have
effect from 1 January 1990.
(3) Absences from Duty
(a) An employee whose ordinary hours are arranged in accordance with
subparagraph (iii) or (iv) of paragraph (a) of subclause (2)
Implementation of 38 Hour Week – of Clause 10. – Hours and who is
paid wages in accordance with paragraph (b)
of subclause (1) hereof and is
absent from duty (except for paid leave pursuant to Clause 18. – Holidays
and Annual Leave,
except annual leave, and Clause 17. – Absence Through
Sickness) shall, for each day or part day he/she is so absent lose the
pay “credit” or 0.4 hours for that day.
(b) Consequently, during the week of the work cycle he/she is to work less
than 38 ordinary hours he/she will not be entitled to average
pay for that week.
In that week, the average pay will be reduced by the amount of the “
credit” he/she does not accrue
for each whole or part day during the work
cycle he/she is absent.
(4) Alternative Method of Payment.
An alternative method of paying wages to that prescribed by subclauses (1)
and (2) of this clause may be agreed between the employer
and the majority of
the employees concerned.
(5) (a) When an employee is dismissed (other than for misconduct) or
lawfully terminates his/her service, he/she shall be paid all
wages due to
him/her before leaving the job unless that payment is prevented because of
circumstances beyond the control of the employer.
Otherwise all monies due shall
be posted on the next working day to the employee’s last known address or
such other address
as may be nominated by the employee.
(b) In the case of an employee whose ordinary hours are arranged in
accordance with subparagraph (ii) or (iv) of paragraph (a) of
subclause (2)
– Implementation of 38 Hour Week – of Clause 10. – Hours and
who is paid average pay and who has
not taken the day off due to him/her during
the work cycle in which his/her employment is terminated, the wages due to that
shall include a total of credits accrued during the work cycle.
Provided further, where the employee has taken a day off during the work
cycle in which his/her employment is terminated, the wages
due to that employee
shall be reduced by the total of credits which have not accrued during the work
(6) Payment of wages shall be made at least once weekly and, at the option
of the employer, may be paid by Electronics Funds Transfer.
(7) Subject to subclause (4) hereof, where an employee is required to spend
time in waiting for wages or attending the employer’s
office on a
subsequent day, he/she shall be paid at the ordinary rate of pay for the time so
spent, in addition to any fares incurred.
Providing that this subclause shall
not apply where such waiting or attending was due to an underpayment caused by a
genuine mistake
or by a genuine dispute as to amount due.
(8) Pay Packet Details:
Particulars of details of payment to each employee shall be included on the
envelope holding the payment, or in a statement handed
to the employee at the
time such payment is made and shall contain the following
information -
(a) Date of payment.
(b) Period covered by such payment.
(c) The amount of wages paid for work at ordinary rates.
(d) The gross amount of wages and allowances paid.
(e) The amount of each deduction made and the nature thereof
(f) The net amount of wages and allowances paid.
In addition, the following details will also be included in the statement
which such payments and benefits apply:
(g) The number of hours paid at overtime rates and the amount paid
12herefore.
(h) The amount of allowances of special rates paid and the nature
(i) Annual leave payments.
(j) Payment due on termination, including payment for annual leave,
rostered day off accumulation, and public holidays, (on termination
(k) The employer and employee’s superannuation number upon payments
of superannuation for the employee.
(l) The amount of superannuation contribution paid by the employer for the
16. - PAYMENT OF WAGES
(1) Wages shall be paid as follows:
(a) Actual hours
In the case of an employee whose hours of duty are constant each week,
wages shall be paid weekly or fortnightly according to the
actual ordinary hours
worked each week or fortnight.
(b) Average hours
In the case of an employee whose hours of duty are averaged each week
during a particular work cycle, wages shall be paid weekly or
fortnightly
according to a weekly average of ordinary hours of duty even though more or less
hours may be worked in any particular
week of the work cycle.
(2) (a) Where an employee is paid in accordance with clause 16(1)(b), the
average weekly pay will be reduced by the ordinary hourly
rate for each hour the
employee is absent from duty other than on paid leave.
(b) When an employee is dismissed (other than for misconduct) or lawfully
terminates their service, they shall be paid all wages due
to them before
leaving the job unless that payment is prevented because of circumstances beyond
the control of the employer. Otherwise
all moneys due shall be paid on the next
working day.
(c) In the case of an employee who is paid average pay and who has not
taken time off due to them during the work cycle in which their
employment is
terminated, the wages due to that employee shall include a total of credits
accrued during the work cycle. Provided
further, where the employee has taken
time off during the work cycle in which their employment is terminated, the
wages due to that
employee shall be reduced by the total of credits which have
not accrued during the work cycle.
(3) The employee’s wages may be paid by cash or direct transfer into
the employee's nominated bank account.
(4) Wages paid in cash shall be paid in the employee’s time. Payment
of wages shall be made at least weekly or fortnightly.
(6) An employer must keep employment records and provide pay slips in
accordance with
of Division 2F ‘Keeping of and access to
employment records and pay slips’ of the
Industrial Relations Act
(WA) and section 26 of the
Long Service Leave Act 1958
16. - UNDER-RATE EMPLOYEES
(1) Any employee who by reason of old age or infirmity is unable to earn
the minimum wage may be paid such lesser wage as may from
time to time be agreed
upon in writing between the union and the employer.
(2) In the event of no agreement being arrived at the matter may be
referred to the Board of Reference for determination.
(3) After application has been made to the Board and pending the
Board’s decision, the employee shall be entitled to work for
employed at the proposed lesser rate.
17. - SUPPORTED WAGE SYSTEM
(1) Definitions
This clause defines the conditions which will apply to employees who
because of the effects of a disability are eligible for a supported
the terms of this award. In the context of this clause, the following
definitions will apply:
(a) approved assessor means a person accredited by the management unit
established by the Commonwealth under the Supported Wage System
assessments of an individual’s productive capacity within the Supported
Wage System.
(b) assessment instrument means the tool provided for under the Supported
Wage System that records the assessment of the productive
capacity of the person
to be employed under the Supported Wage System.
(c) disability support pension means the Commonwealth Government pension
scheme to provide income security for persons with a disability
as provided
Social Security Act 1991
, as amended from time to time, or any
successor to that scheme.
(d) supported wage system (SWS) means the Commonwealth Government system to
promote employment for people who cannot work at full
award wages because of a
disability, as documented in the Supported Wage System Handbook. The Handbook is
available from the following
website: www.jobaccess.gov.au.
(e) SWS wage assessment agreement means the document in the form required
by the Department of Social Services that records the employee’s
productive capacity and agreed wage rate.
(2) Eligibility criteria
(a) Employees covered by this clause will be those who are unable to
perform the range of duties to the competence level required
within the class of
work for which the employee is engaged under this award, because of the effects
of a disability on their productive
capacity and who meet the impairment
criteria for receipt of a Disability Support Pension.
(b) This clause does not apply to any existing employee who has a claim
against the employer which is subject to the provisions of
workers compensation
legislation or any provision of this award relating to the rehabilitation of
employees who are injured in the
course of their current employment.
(3) Supported wage rates
(a) Employees to whom this clause applies will be paid the applicable
percentage of the minimum rate of pay prescribed by this award
for the class of
work which the person is performing according to the following schedule:
Assessed Capacity
% of Prescribed Award Rate
(b) Provided that the minimum amount payable must not be less than $106.00
(c) Where an employee’s assessed capacity is 10%, they must receive a
high degree of assistance and support.
(4) Assessment of capacity
(a) For the purpose of establishing the percentage of the award rate to be
paid to an employee under this award, the productive capacity
of the employee
will be assessed in accordance with the SWS by an approved assessor, having
consulted the employer and employee and,
if the employee so desires, the
(b) All assessments made under this clause must be documented in a SWS wage
assessment agreement and retained by the employer as a
time and wages
(5) Lodgement of SWS wage assessment agreement
(a) All SWS wage assessment agreements under the conditions of this clause,
including the appropriate percentage of the award wage
to be paid to the
employee, must be lodged by the employer with the Commission.
(b) All SWS wage assessment agreements must be agreed and signed by the
employee and employer parties to the assessment. Where the
union is not a party
to the assessment, the assessment will be referred by the Commission to the
union by certified mail and the
agreement will take effect unless an objection
is notified to the Commission within 10 working days.
(6) Review of assessment
The assessment of the applicable percentage should be subject to annual
review or earlier on the basis of a reasonable request for
such a review. The
process of review will be in accordance with the procedures for assessing
capacity under the SWS.
(7) Other terms and conditions of employment
Where an assessment has been made, the applicable percentage will apply to
the wage rate only. Employees covered by the provisions
of this clause will be
entitled to the same terms and conditions of employment as all other employees
covered by this award paid
on a pro-rata basis.
(8) Workplace adjustment
An employer wishing to employ a person under the provisions of this clause
must take reasonable steps to make changes in the workplace
to enhance the
employee’s capacity to do the job. Changes may involve redesign of job
duties, working time arrangements and
work organisation in consultation with
other employees in the area.
(9) Trial period
(a) In order for an adequate assessment of the employee’s capacity to
be made, an employer may employ a person under the provisions
of this clause for
a trial period not exceeding 12 weeks, except that in some cases additional work
adjustment time (not exceeding
4 weeks) may be needed.
(b) During the trial period the assessment of capacity will be undertaken
and the proposed wage rate for a continuing employment relationship
determined.
(c) The minimum amount payable to the employee during the trial period must
be no less than $106.00 per week.
(d) Work trials should include induction or training as appropriate to the
job being trialled.
(e) Where the employer and employee wish to establish a continuing
employment relationship following the completion of the trial period,
contract of employment will be entered into based on the outcome of assessment
under subclause (4) – Assessment of
28. - SUPERANNUATION
The superannuation provisions contained herein operate subject to the
requirements of the hereinafter prescribed provision titled
– Compliance,
Nomination and Transition.
(1) Application:
(a) Subject to the provisions of subclause (4) Exemptions of this
clause, each employer to whom this Award applies shall execute
an agreement to
become a contributor to an approved Occupational Superannuation Scheme, within
one month of the enactment of this
(b) For the purpose of this Award an approved Occupational
Superannuation Scheme means any scheme which complies with the standards
occupational superannuation schemes under the
Occupational Superannuation
Standards Act 1987
and Regulations made thereunder.
(2) Contributions:
(a) Subject to the provisions of subclause (4) Exemptions of this
clause, each employer shall make monthly contributions to the
fund in respect of
all eligible employees at the rate of 9% of ordinary time earnings.
(b) Eligible employees are full-time and part-time employees to whose
employment this Award applies and whose length of employment
with the employer
exceeds one month.
(c) Subject to the provisions of subclauses (3) Employee Entry into Fund
and (4) Exemptions of this clause, contributions shall be
made in respect of
each current eligible employee from the date the employer executes the fund
trust deed. Contributions in respect
of all other eligible employees shall be
made from commencement of employment with the employer but in no case prior to
the employer executes the fund trust deed.
(d) “Ordinary time earnings” (which for the purposes of the
Superannuation Guarantee (Administration) Act 1992
will operate to
provide a notional earnings base) shall mean the actual ordinary rate of pay the
employee receives for ordinary hours
of work leading hand where applicable. The
term includes any regular over-award pay as well as casual rates received, and
rates and allowances paid for work undertaken during ordinary hours
of work excluding fares and travel and other reimbursement allowances.
(e) No contributions shall be made for periods of unpaid leave, or
unauthorised absences in excess of 38 ordinary hours or for periods
workers’ compensation in excess of 26 weeks. No shall be made in respect
of annual leave paid out on termination or any
other payments on
termination.
(3) Employee Entry into Fund:
(a) On executing the fund trust deed the employer shall provide each
current employee with an application form and documentation explaining
(b) If an employee fails to return to the employer a completed application
form to join the fund within two weeks of receipt, the
employer shall provide a
reminder notice together with an application form and documentation explaining
the fund to the employee.
(c) If the employee fails to complete and return the application to join
the fund within two weeks of receipt of the second form,
no contribution need be
made in respect of that employee until such time as a completed application form
is received by the employer.
(d) It shall be the responsibility of the employer to ensure that all new
employees complete an application to join the fund during
the first month of
employment. Provided that where an eligible employee refuses to complete an
application to join the fund the employer
shall notify the union in writing of
the employee’s refusal to do so.
(4) Exemptions:
(a) Employers of eligible employees who are covered by a Superannuation
Order or Award made pursuant to the
Industrial Relations Act 1979
exempted from the provisions of this clause in respect of those employees to
whose employment the said Order or Award applies.
(b) Employers of eligible employees who are contributing to a
Superannuation Fund in accordance with an Order or Award made pursuant
Industrial Relations Act 1979
, the Conciliation and Arbitration Act 1904 or the
Industrial Relations Act 1988
for a majority of employees and, at the date of
issue of this Order, make payment for eligible employees covered by this Award
accordance with that Order or Award shall be exempt from the provisions of
this clause.
An employer may make an application to the Western Australian Industrial
Relations Commission for exemption from the provisions of
this clause and until
proceedings before the Western Australian Industrial Relations Commission are
finalised, the provisions of
this clause shall be deemed to have been complied
Compliance, Nomination and Transition
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere herein which requires that
contribution be made to a superannuation fund or scheme in
respect of an
employee, on and from 30 June 1998 -
(a) Any such fund or scheme shall no longer be a complying superannuation
fund or scheme for the purposes of this clause unless -
(i) the fund or scheme is a complying fund or scheme within the meaning of
Superannuation Guarantee (Administration) Act 1992
of the Commonwealth;
(ii) under the governing rules of the fund or scheme, contributions may be
made by or in respect of the employee permitted to nominate
(b) The employee shall be entitled to nominate the complying superannuation
fund or scheme to which contributions are to be made by
or in respect of the
(c) The employer shall notify the employee of the entitlement to nominate a
complying superannuation fund or scheme as soon as practicable;
(d) A nomination or notification of the type referred to in paragraphs (b)
and (c) of this subclause shall, subject to the requirements
of regulations made
pursuant to the
Industrial Relations Legislation Amendment and Repeal Act 1995
be given in writing to the employer or the employee to whom such is
(e) The employee and employer shall be bound by the nomination of the
employee unless the employee and employer agree to change the
superannuation fund or scheme to which contributions are to be made;
(f) The employer shall not unreasonably refuse to agree to a change of
complying superannuation fund or scheme requested by a employee;
Provided that on and from 30 June 1998, and until an employee thereafter
nominates a complying superannuation fund or scheme -
(g) if one or more complying superannuation funds or schemes to which
contributions may be made be specified herein, the employer
is required to make
contributions to that fund or scheme, or one of those funds or schemes nominated
by the employer;
(h) if no complying superannuation fund or scheme to which contributions
may be made be specified herein, the employer is required
to make contributions
to a complying fund or scheme nominated by the employer.
18. – SUPERANNUATION
Superannuation Guarantee (Administration) Act 1992
Superannuation Guarantee Charge Act 1992
Superannuation
Industry (Supervision) Act 1993
(Cth) and the
Superannuation (Resolution
of Complaints) Act 1993
(Cth) deals with the superannuation rights and
obligations of employers and employees.
(2) The employer must make superannuation contributions to a superannuation
fund for the benefit of an employee as will avoid the
employer being required to
pay the superannuation guarantee charge under superannuation legislation with
respect to that employee.
(3) The employer must notify the employee of the entitlement to nominate a
complying superannuation fund or scheme to which contributions
in respect of the
employee may be made.
(4) The employer must make contributions to a complying fund or scheme
nominated by the employer until the employee nominates such
(5) The employer and the employee are bound by the employee’s
nomination unless the employer and employee agree to change the
superannuation fund or scheme to which contributions are to be made.
(6) An employer must not unreasonably refuse to agree to a change of
complying superannuation fund or scheme requested by an employee.
Insert the following as a heading before clause 19 ‘Personal
17. - ABSENCE THROUGH SICKNESS OR BEREAVEMENT
(1) An employee shall be entitled to payment for non-attendance at work
during ordinary hours on the ground of personal ill-health
or injury at the rate
of one- sixth of a week’s pay at the rate prescribed for his/her
classification by Clause 13. –
Wages for each completed month of
(2) Payment hereunder may be adjusted at the end of each calendar year or
at the time the employee leaves the service of the employer,
in the event of the
employee being entitled by service subsequent to the sickness or injury to a
greater allowance than that made
at the time the sickness or injury
(3) This clause shall not apply to employees who are entitled to payment
under the Workers’ Compensation and Assistance Act
nor to employees whose
injury or illness is the result of the employee’s own misconduct.
(4) (a) The employee shall, where possible, within 24 hours of the
commencement of such absence, inform the employer of his/her
inability to attend
for duty, and, as far as practicable state the nature of the injury or illness
and the estimated duration of
the absence.
(b) No employee shall be entitled to the benefits of this clause unless
he/she produces proof satisfactory to his/her employer of
sickness or injury,
but the employer shall not be entitled to a medical certificate unless the
absence is for three days or more.
(5) Notwithstanding the provisions of subclause (4) hereof, an employee,
who in any calendar year, has already been allowed paid sick
leave on one
occasion for one day only shall not be entitled to payment for any further
absence of one day only unless he/she produces
to the employer a medical
certificate stating that he/she was unable to attend for duty on account of
personal ill-health or injury.
(6) Sick leave shall accumulate from year to year so that any balance of
the period specified in subclause (1) of this clause which
has in any year not
been allowed to any employee by his/her employer as paid sick leave may be
claimed by the employee and, subject
to the conditions hereinbefore prescribed,
shall be allowed by his/her employer in any subsequent year without diminution
sick leave prescribed in respect of that year. Provided that an employee
shall not be entitled to claim payment for any period exceeding
ten weeks in any
one year of service.
An employee shall, on the death within Australia of a wife, husband,
father, mother, brother, sister, child or stepchild, be entitled
on notice of
leave up to and including the day of the funeral of such relation and such leave
shall be without deduction of pay for
a period not exceeding the number of hours
worked by the employee in two ordinary days of work. Proof of such death to be
by the employee to the satisfaction of his/her employer.
Provided that this subclause shall have no operation while the period of
entitlement to leave under it coincides with any other period
of entitlement to
For the purposes of this subclause the words “wife” and
“husband” shall include a person who lives with the
employee as a de
facto wife or husband.
19. - PERSONAL LEAVE
Paid and unpaid personal leave, including carer’s leave, is as
provided for in the
Minimum Conditions of Employment Act 1993
20. - BEREAVEMENT LEAVE
Bereavement leave is as provided for in the
Minimum Conditions of
Employment Act 1993
21. - FAMILY AND DOMESTIC VIOLENCE LEAVE
Family and Domestic Violence leave is provided for in Division 7
Fair Work Act 2009
(Cth) and the
Minimum Conditions of
Employment Act 1993
18. - HOLIDAYS AND ANNUAL LEAVE
(1) (a) The following days, or the days observed in lieu shall, subject to
this subclause be allowed as holidays without deduction
of pay, namely –
New Year’s Day, Australia Day, Good Friday, Easter Monday, Anzac Day,
Labour Day, Foundation Day, Sovereign’s
Birthday, Christmas Day and Boxing
Day. Provided that another day may be taken as a holiday by arrangement between
the parties in
lieu of any of the days named in this subclause.
(b) Where any of the days mentioned in paragraph (a) hereof falls on a
Saturday or a Sunday, the holiday shall be observed on the
next succeeding
Monday, provided that when a Boxing Day falls on a Sunday or a Monday the
holiday shall be observed on the next succeeding
Tuesday. In each case the
substituted day shall be a holiday without deduction of pay and the day for
which it is substituted shall
not be a holiday.
(2) (a) All employees required to work on the days named in subclause
(1)(a) hereof shall be paid at the rate of double time and a
half for all time
(b) All employees required to work on any Sunday shall be paid double time
rate for all time worked on any such day.
(3) On any public holiday not prescribed as a holiday under this award the
employer’s establishment or place of business may
be closed in which case
an employee need not present himself for duty and payment may be deducted, but
if work be done ordinary rates
of pay shall apply.
(4) Except as hereinafter provided a period of four consecutive
weeks’ leave with payment of ordinary wages as prescribed shall
annually to an employee by his/her employer after a period of twelve
months’ continuous service with such employer.
(5) (a) During a period of annual leave an employee shall be paid a loading
of 17½ per cent, calculated on his/her ordinary wage
as prescribed.
(b) The loading prescribed by this subclause shall not apply to
proportionate leave on termination.
(6) If any prescribed holiday falls within an employee’s period of
annual leave and is observed on a day which in the case of
that employee would
have been an ordinary working day there shall be added to that period one day
being an ordinary working day for
each such holiday observed as aforesaid.
(7) If after one month’s continuous service in any qualifying twelve
monthly period an employee leaves his/her employment on
or after the 1 st day of
January, 1984 or his/her employment is terminated by the employer through no
fault of the employee, the
employee shall be paid 2.932 hours pay at his/her
ordinary hourly rate of wage in respect of each completed week of service from
January 1, 1984 up until the date of termination. Should an employee leave
his/her employment before the 1 st day of January 1984,
he/she shall be paid
one-third of a week’s pay at his/her ordinary rate of wage in respect of
each completed month of service
in any qualifying twelve monthly period up until
January 2, 1984.
(8) Any time in respect of which an employee is absent from work except
time for which he/she is entitled to claim sick pay or time
spent on holidays or
annual leave as prescribed by this award shall not count for the purpose of
determining his/her right to annual
(9) In the event of an employee being employed by an employer for portion
only of a year, he/she shall only be entitled, subject to
subclause (7) of this
clause to such leave on full pay as is proportionate to his/her length of
service during that period with such
employer, and if such leave is not equal to
the leave given to the other employees he/she shall not be entitled to work or
the other employees of such employer are on leave on full pay.
(10) (a) In addition to any payment to which he/she may be entitled under
subclause (7) of this clause, an employee, whose employment
terminates after
he/she has completed a twelve monthly qualifying period and who has not been
allowed leave prescribed under this
award in respect of that qualifying period
shall be given payment in lieu of that leave or, in a case to which paragraph
(b) of this
subclause or subclause (13) of this clause applies, in lieu of so
much of that leave as has not been allowed unless -
(i) he/she has been justifiably dismissed for misconduct; and
(ii) the misconduct for which he/she has been dismissed occurred prior to
the completion of that qualifying period.
(b) In special circumstances and by mutual consent of the employer, the
employee and the union concerned, annual leave may be taken
in not more than two
(11) For the purpose of this clause “double time” rate shall be
the rate which is payable to the employee on any ordinary
working day
(including all allowances paid in accordance with the provisions of Clause 13.
– Wages) multiplied by two.
(12) The provisions of this clause shall not apply to casual
(13) Notwithstanding anything else herein contained an employer who
observes a Christmas closedown for the purpose of granting annual
require an employee to take his/her annual leave in not more than two periods
but neither of such periods shall be less
than one week.
22. - PUBLIC HOLIDAYS
(1) (a) The following days, or the days observed in lieu shall, subject to
this subclause be recognised as public holidays for the
purpose of this award
namely - New Year’s Day, Australia Day, Good Friday, Easter Sunday. Easter
Monday, Anzac Day, Labour
Day, Western Australia Day, Sovereign’s
Birthday, Christmas Day and Boxing Day. Provided that another day may be taken
holiday by arrangement between the parties in lieu of any of the days named
in this subclause.
(b) An employee is entitled to be absent from work without loss of pay on a
day or part of a day that is a public holiday for the
purpose of this award, or
a public holiday as defined in the
Minimum Conditions of Employment Act
(c) Where any of the days mentioned in paragraph (a) hereof, other than
Easter Sunday, falls on a Saturday or a Sunday, the holiday
shall be observed on
the next succeeding Monday, provided that when a Boxing Day falls on a Sunday or
a Monday the holiday shall
be observed on the next succeeding Tuesday. In each
case the substituted day shall be a holiday without deduction of pay and the
for which it is substituted shall not be a holiday.
(2) The employer may request that an employee work on a day or part of a
day that is a public holiday if the request is reasonable.
(3) If the employer makes a request, the employee may refuse the request if
(a) the request is not reasonable; or
(b) the refusal is reasonable.
(4) In determining whether a request or refusal is reasonable, the
following must be taken into account -
(a) the nature and conduct of the employer’s business or
operations;
(b) the nature of the employee’s work;
(c) the employee’s personal circumstances, including family
responsibilities
(d) whether the employee could reasonably expect that the employer might
request work on the public holiday;
(e) whether the employee is entitled to receive overtime payments, penalty
rates or other compensation (including compensation in
the form of an annualised
salary) for, or a level of remuneration that reflects an expectation of, work on
the public holiday;
(f) the type of employment of the employee (for example, whether full time,
part time, casual or shift work);
(g) the amount of notice in advance of the public holiday given
(i) by the employer when making the request; or
(ii) by the employee when refusing the request.
(5) All employees required to work on a public holiday shall be paid at the
rate of double time and a half for all time worked.
(6) Where a day is proclaimed as a public holiday or public half-holiday
under section 7 of the
Public and Bank Holidays Act 1972
(WA), either
throughout the State or within a district or locality as specified in the
proclamation, that day will be a public holiday
or public half-holiday for the
purposes of this award within the area specified in the proclamation.
23. - ANNUAL LEAVE
(1) Annual leave is as provided for in the
Minimum Conditions of
Employment Act 1993
(2) (a) During a period of annual leave an employee shall be paid a
loading of 17½%, calculated on their ordinary wage as prescribed.
(b) The loading prescribed by this subclause shall not apply to
proportionate leave on termination.
(3) The provisions of this clause shall not apply to casual
25. - LONG SERVICE LEAVE
The Long Service Leave provisions published in Volume 60 of the
“Western Australian Industrial Gazette” at pages 1 to
6 inclusive
are hereby incorporated in and shall be deemed to be part of this award.
24. - LONG SERVICE LEAVE
The Long Service Leave provisions of the
Long Service Leave Act 1958
(WA) are hereby incorporated in and shall be deemed to be part of this
27. - MATERNITY LEAVE
(1) Eligibility for Maternity Leave:
An employee who becomes pregnant shall, upon production to her employer of
a certificate from a duly qualified medical practitioner
stating the presumed
date of her confinement, be entitled to maternity leave provided that she has
had not less than 12 months’
continuous service with that employer
immediately proceeding the date upon which she proceeds upon such leave.
For the purpose of this clause:
(a) An employee shall include a part-time employee but shall not include an
employee engaged upon casual or seasonal work.
(b) Maternity leave shall mean unpaid maternity leave.
(2) Period of Leave and Commencement of Leave.
(a) Subject of subclauses (3) and (6) hereof, the period of maternity leave
shall be for an unbroken period of from 12 to 52 weeks
and shall include a
period of six weeks’ compulsory leave to be taken immediately following
confinement.
(b) An employee shall, not less than 10 weeks prior to the presumed date of
confinement, give notice in writing to her employer stating
the presumed date of
confinement.
(c) An employee shall give not less than four weeks’ notice in
writing to her employer of the date upon which she proposes to
maternity leave, stating the period of leave to be taken.
(d) An employer by not less than 14 days’ notice in writing to the
employee may require her to commence maternity leave at any
time within the six
weeks immediately prior to her presumed date of confinement.
(e) An employee shall not be in breach of this order as a consequence of
failure to give the stipulated period of notice in accordance
with paragraph (c)
hereof if such failure is occasioned by the confinement occurring earlier that
the presumed date.
(3) Transfer to a Safe-Job. Where in the opinion of a duly qualified
medical practitioner, illness or risks arising out of the pregnancy
connected with the work assigned to the employee make it inadvisable for the
employee to continue at her present work,
the employee shall, if the employer
deems it practicable, be transferred to a safe job at the rate and on the
conditions attaching
to that job until the commencement of maternity
If the transfer to a safe job is not practicable, the employee may, or the
employer may require the employee to take leave for such
period as is certified
necessary by a duly qualified medical practitioner. Such leave shall be treated
as maternity leave for the
purposes of subclauses (7), (8), (9) and (10)
(4) Variation of Period of Maternity Leave.
(a) Provided the addition does not extend the maternity leave beyond 52
weeks, the period may be lengthened once only, save with the
agreement of the
employer, by the employee giving not less than 14 days’ notice in writing
stating the period by which the
leave is to be lengthened.
(b) The period of leave may, with the consent of the employer, be shortened
by the employee giving not less than 14 days’ notice
in writing stating
the period by which the leave is to be shortened.
(5) Cancellation of Maternity Leave.
(a) Maternity leave, applied for but not commenced, shall be cancelled when
the pregnancy of an employee terminates other than by
the birth of a living
(b) Where the pregnancy of an employee then on maternity leave terminates
other than by the birth of a living child, it shall be the
right of the employee
to resume work at a time nominated by the employer which shall not exceed four
weeks from the date of notice
in writing by the employee to the employer that
she desires to resume work.
(6) Special Maternity Leave and Sick Leave.
(a) Where a pregnancy of an employee not then on maternity leave terminates
after 28 weeks other than by the birth of a living child
(i) she shall be entitled to such period of unpaid leave (to be known as
special maternity leave) as a duly qualified medical practitioner
certifies as
necessary before her return to work, or
(ii) for illness other than the normal consequences of confinement she
shall be entitled, either in lieu of or in addition to special
maternity leave,
to such paid sick leave as to which she is then entitled and which a duly
qualified medical practitioner certifies
as necessary before her return to
(b) Where an employee not then on maternity leave suffers illness related
to her pregnancy, she may take such paid sick leave as to
which she is then
entitled and such further unpaid leave (to be known as special maternity leave)
as a duly qualified medical practitioner
certifies as necessary before her
maternity leave and maternity
leave shall not exceed 52 weeks.
(c) For the purposes of subclauses (7), (8) and (9) hereof, maternity leave
shall include special maternity leave,
(d) An employee returning to work after the completion of a period of leave
taken pursuant to this subclause shall be entitled to
the position which she
held immediately before proceeding on such leave or, in the case of an employee
who was transferred to a safe
job pursuant to subclause (3), to the position she
held immediately before such transfer.
Where such position no longer exists but there are other positions
available, for which the employee is qualified and the duties of
which she is
capable of performing, she shall be entitled to a position as nearly comparable
in status and salary or wages to that
of her former position.
(7) Maternity Leave and Other Leave Entitlements:
Provided the aggregate of leave including leave taken pursuant to
subclauses (3) and (6) hereof does not exceed 52 weeks:
(a) An employee may, in lieu of or in conjunction with maternity leave,
take any annual leave or long service leave or any part thereof
to which she is
then entitled.
(b) Paid sick leave or other paid authorised award absences (excluding
annual leave or long service leave), shall not be available
to an employee
during her absence on maternity leave.
(8) Effect of Maternity Leave on Employment:
Notwithstanding any award, or other provision to the contrary, absence on
maternity leave shall not break the continuity of service
of an employee but
shall not be taken into account in calculating the period of service for any
purposes of the award.
(9) Termination of Employment.
(a) An employee on maternity leave may terminate her employment at any time
during the period of leave by notice given in accordance
with this award.
(b) An employer shall not terminate the employment of an employee on the
ground of her pregnancy or of her absence on maternity leave,
but otherwise the
rights of an employer in relation to termination of employment are not hereby
(10) Return to Work After Maternity Leave.
(a) An employee shall confirm her intention of returning to her work by
notice in writing to the employer given not less than four
weeks prior to the
expiration of her period of maternity leave.
(b) An employee, upon the expiration of the notice required by paragraph
(a) hereof, shall be entitled to the position which she held
immediately before
proceeding on maternity leave or, in the case of an employee who was transferred
to a safe job pursuant to subclause
(3), to the position which she held
immediately before such transfer. Where such position no longer exists but there
are other positions
available for which the employee is qualified and the duties
of which she is capable of performing, she shall be entitled to a position
nearly comparable in status and salary or wage to that of her former
(11) Replacement Employees.
(a) A replacement employee is an employee specifically engaged as a result
of an employee proceeding on maternity leave.
(b) Before an employer engages a replacement employee under this subclause,
the employer shall inform that person of the temporary
nature of the employment
and of the rights of the employee who is being replaced.
(c) Before an employer engages a person to replace an employee temporarily
promoted or transferred in order to replace an employee
exercising her rights
under this clause, the employer shall inform that person of the temporary nature
of the promotion or transfer
and of the rights of the employee who is being
(d) Provided that nothing in this subclause shall be construed as requiring
an employer to engage a replacement employee.
(e) A replacement employee shall not be entitled to any of the rights
conferred by this clause except where her employment continues
beyond the 12
months’ qualifying period.
25.- PARENTAL LEAVE
Parental leave is provided for in accordance with Division 5 of
Fair Work Act 2009
Insert the following as a heading before clause 26 ‘Right of Entry
and Inspection of Records.
19. - RECORDS
(1) In addition to the requirements of the
Industrial Relations (General)
Regulations 1997
, each employer shall keep a record, on a separate page for each
employee, from which can be readily ascertained the following:
(a) the name of each employee and his/her classification;
(b) each day worked, the hours worked each day, including time of starting
and finishing work each day, overtime hours worked and
meal breaks taken;
(c) the gross amount of ordinary wages, overtime wages, special rates and
specific allowances paid each week;
(d) the amount of each deduction and the nature thereof;
(e) the net amount of wages and allowances paid each week;
(f) any relevant records which detail taxation deductions and remittances
to the Australian Taxation Office, including those payments
made as PAYE tax
whether under a Group Employer’s Scheme or not;
(g) where an employer is required to make payments to the Construction
Industry Long Service Leave Board, a certificate or other documentation
Board which will confirm the employer’s registration, the date of the last
payment, and the period for which that
payment applies;
(h) the employer’s and the employee’s Occupational
Superannuation Scheme number and the contribution returns by the
employer to
the Scheme on behalf of the employee, where such benefit applies; and
(2) In addition, the employer shall record the location of the job if it is
outside the Perth Metropolitan area.
(3) The employer shall provide evidence of the employer’s current
Workers Compensation Policy or other satisfactory proof of
insurance such as a
renewal certificate.
(4) Subject to subclause (6) of this clause, all records and documentation
referred to in subclauses (1), (2) and (3), or copies thereof,
available for inspection by a duly accredited official under the rules of an
organisation of employees bound by this Award
during the usual office hours, at
the employer’s office or other convenient place. If desired, the official
may take extracts
from the records and documentation.
Before exercising the power of inspection, reasonable notice of not less
than 24 hours of the intention to inspect the records must
be given to the
employer by the union or duly accredited union official.
(5) If the secretary of the union reasonably suspects that a breach of the
award has occurred, copies of the appropriate records may,
by agreement, be
provided to the official for retention, or sent to the union office within seven
days of notification of the suspected
(6) The employer may refuse the representative access to the records if the
(a) is of the opinion that access to the records by a duly accredited
official of the organisation of employees would infringe the
who are not members of the union;
(b) undertakes to produce the records to an Industrial Inspector within 48
hours of being notified of the requirements to inspect
by the Union official;
(c) complies with the undertaking to produce the records to an Industrial
26. - RIGHT OF ENTRY AND INSPECTION OF RECORDS
Conditions regarding the right of entry by authorised representatives of
the union for the purpose of inspection of records are dealt
Division 2G ‘Right of Entry and Inspection by authorised
representatives’ of the
Industrial Relations Act 1979
21. - REPRESENTATIVE INTERVIEWING EMPLOYEES
Consistent with the terms of the
Labour Relations Legislation Amendment Act
S.23(3)(c)(iii)
Industrial Relations Act
a representative of the
Union shall not exercise the rights under this clause with respect to entering
any part of the premises of
the employer unless the employer is the employer, or
former employer of a member of the Union.
(1) The Secretary or any authorised officer of the union or association
shall be allowed free access to any job or shop at any time
during the meal
period and, with the consent of the employer or his/her foreperson at any other
time, to interview any of the employees
if he/she desires to do so.
(2) The Secretary or any authorised representative of the union or
association shall have the right to visit and inspect any factory
or works or
any part thereof during the time that work is being carried on outside the
ordinary working hours and to interview employees
CLAUSE DELETED
20. - POSTING COPY OF AWARD AND UNION NOTICES
(1) No employer shall prevent an official of the employees’ union
from posting a copy of this award, or any union notice, not
exceeding fourteen
inches by nine inches in a suitable place on any job.
(2) Liberty to apply to amend this clause is reserved in the event of any
objectionable notice being posted.
27. - POSTING COPY OF AWARD AND UNION NOTICES
No employer shall prevent an official of the employees’ union from
posting a copy of this award, or any union notice, not exceeding
36 cm by 23cm
in a suitable place on any job.
26. - GRIEVANCE AND DISPUTES PROCEDURE
All parties (employers, employees and the Union – including all of
its officers and officials) accept and provide a commitment
to abide by the
following to prevent disputation:
(1) An employee (or shop steward) shall immediately refer any grievance, or
other matter which may lead to a dispute, to the foreperson
or immediate
supervisor.
(2) If the grievance, or other such matter likely to lead to dispute, is
not resolved following the procedures outlined in subclause
(1), it shall be
immediately referred to the appropriate officer nominated by the employer to
deal with such matters.
(3) If any grievance, or other such matter is not resolved through the
procedures outlined in subclause (2) it shall be immediately
referred to the
appropriate full- time official of the Union.
(4) The aforementioned Union official shall take all steps necessary to
resolve the matter and the Union official and the Union, its
officers and
members, shall, at all times, act in accordance with the rules of the Union and
the provisions of the
Industrial Relations Act, 1979
(5) If any grievance or other matter is not resolved through the procedures
outlined in subclauses (3) and (4) it shall be immediately
referred to the
Commission for determination.
(6) Nothing shall prevent any party from immediately referring any
grievance, or other such matter which is likely to lead to a dispute,
Commission.
(7) There shall be no bans, limitations or any other form of industrial
action and normal uninterrupted work shall continue at the
direction of the
employer whilst any matters are processed through this Grievance and Disputes
RENUMBERED AND RENAMED:
28. - DISPUTE RESOLUTION PROCEDURE
29. - INTRODUCTION OF CHANGE
(1) Where an employer has made a definite decision to introduce major
changes in production, programme, organisation, structure or
technology that are
likely to have significant effects on employees, the employer shall notify the
employees who may be affected
by the proposed changes and their union or
(2) The employer shall discuss with its employees affected and their union,
the introduction of the changes referred to in subclause
(1) hereof, the effects
the changes are likely to have on employees, measures to avert or mitigate the
adverse effects of such changes
on employees and shall give prompt consideration
to matters raised by the employees and their union in relation to the
(3) For the purposes of such discussion, the employer shall provide in
writing to the employees concerned and their union, all relevant
information
effects of the changes on employees and
any other matters likely to affect
employees provided that any employer shall not be required to disclose
confidential information
the disclosure of which would be inimical to the
employer’s interests.
(4) In the event of disagreement over the proposed changes the parties
shall consult to resolve the problematic issue(s) and work
shall continue
normally while the matter is discussed.
NO VARIATIONS
30. - REDUNDANCY
(1) Where an employer has made a definite decision that the employer no
longer wishes the job the employee has been doing to be done
by anyone and this
is not due to the ordinary and customary turnover of labour and that decision
may lead to termination of employment,
the employer shall hold discussions with
the employee directly affected and with his/her union.
(2) Transfer to Lower Paid Duties:
Where an employee is transferred to lower paid duties for reasons set out
in subclause (1) hereof the e same period of notice of transfer
as he/she would
have been entitled to if his/her employment had been terminated, and the
employer may, at the employer’s option,
make payment in lieu thereof of an
amount equal to the difference between the former ordinary time rate of pay and
the new lower
ordinary time rates for the number of weeks of notice still
(3) Severance Pay:
In addition to the period of notice prescribed for ordinary termination in
Clause 8. – Contract of Service, and subject to further
order of the
Commission, an employee whose employment is terminated for se (1) hereof shall
be entitled to the following minimum
amount of severance pay in respect of a
continuous period of service.
Period of Continuous Service
Severance Pay Weeks
1 year or less
1 year and up to the completion of 2 years
2 years and up to the completion of 3 years
3 years and up to the completion of 4 years
4 years and over
(4) Employee Leaving During Notice
An employee whose employment is terminated for reasons set out in subclause
(1) hereof may terminate his/her employment during the
period of notice and, if
so, shall be entitled to the same benefits and payments under this clause had
he/she remained with the employer
until the expiry of such notice. Provided that
in such circumstances the employee shall not be entitled to payment in lieu of
(5) Alternative Employment:
An employer, in a particular redundancy case, may make application to the
Western Australian Industrial Relations Commission to have
the general severance
pay prescription varied if the employer obtains acceptable alternative
employment for an employee.
(6) Time Off During Notice Period:
(a) During the period of notice of termination given by the employer an
employee shall be allowed up to one day’s time off without
loss of pay
during each week of notice for the purpose of seeking other employment.
(b) If the employee has been allowed paid leave for more than one day
during the notice period for the purpose of seeking other employment,
employee shall, at the request of the employer, be required to produce proof of
attendance at an interview or he/she shall not
receive payment for the time
absent. For this purpose a statutory declaration will be sufficient.
(7) Subject to further order of the Western Australian Industrial Relations
Commission where an employee who is terminated receives
a benefit from a
superannuation scheme, he/she shall only receive under subclause (3) hereof the
difference between the severance
pay specified in that subclause and the amount
of the superannuation benefit he/she receives which is attributable to employer
contributions
If the superannuation benefit is greater than the amount due under
subclause (3) hereof then he/she shall receive no payment under
(8) Employees with Less than One Year’s Service:
This clause shall not apply to employees with less than one year’s
continuous service and the general obligation on employers
should be no more
than to give relevant employees an indication of the impending redundancy at the
first reasonable opportunity,
and to take such steps as may be reasonable g by
the employees of suitable alternative employment.
(9) Employees Exempted:
This clause shall not apply where employment is terminated as a consequence
of conduct that justifies instant dismissal, including
malingering, inefficiency
or neglect of duty, or in the case of casual employees, apprentices, or
employees engaged for a specific
period of time or for a specific task or
Incapacity to Pay:
An employer, in a particular redundancy case, may make application to the
Western Australian Industrial Relations Commission (to ha
tion varied) [to have
the general severance pay prescription varied] on the basis of the
employer’s incapacity to pay.
30. - REDUNDANCY
(1) Where an employer has made a definite decision that the employer no
longer wishes the job the employee has been doing to be done
by anyone and this
is not due to the ordinary and customary turnover of labour and that decision
may lead to termination of employment,
the employer shall hold discussions with
the employee directly affected and with their union.
(2) Transfer to Lower Paid Duties:
Where an employee is transferred to lower paid duties for reasons set out
in subclause (1) hereof the employee shall be entitled to
the same period of
notice of transfer as they would have been entitled to if their employment had
been terminated, and the employer
may, at the employer’s option, make
payment in lieu thereof of an amount equal to the difference between the former
time rate of pay and the new lower ordinary time rates for the number
of weeks of notice still owing.
(3) Severance Pay:
In addition to the period of notice prescribed for ordinary termination in
Clause 7. – Termination of Employment, and subject
to further order of the
Commission, an employee whose employment is terminated for reasons set out in
subclause (1) hereof shall
be entitled to the following minimum amount of
severance pay in respect of a continuous period of service.
Period of Continuous Service
Severance Pay Weeks
1 year or less
1 year and up to the completion of 2 years
2 years and up to the completion of 3 years
3 years and up to the completion of 4 years
4 years and less than 5 years
5 years and less than 6 years
6 years and less than 7 years
7 years and less than 8 years
8 years and less than 9 years
9 years and less than 10 years
10 years and over
(4) Employee Leaving During Notice:
An employee whose employment is terminated for reasons set out in subclause
(1) hereof may terminate their employment during the period
of notice and, if
so, shall be entitled to the same benefits and payments under this clause had
they remained with the employer until
the expiry of such notice. Provided that
in such circumstances the employee shall not be entitled to payment in lieu of
(5) Alternative Employment:
An employer, in a particular redundancy case, may make an application to
the Western Australian Industrial Relations Commission to
have the general
severance pay prescription varied if the employer obtains acceptable alternative
employment for an employee. This
subclause does not apply in circumstances
involving a transfer of business as set out in clause 4.7 of the Termination,
Redundancy General Order
[2005] WAIRC 01715.
(6) Time Off During Notice Period:
(a) During the period of notice of termination given by the employer an
employee shall be allowed up to one day’s time off without
loss of pay
during each week of notice for the purpose of seeking other employment.
(b) If the employee has been allowed paid leave for more than one day
during the notice period for the purpose of seeking other employment,
employee shall, at the request of the employer, be required to produce proof of
attendance at an interview or they shall not
receive payment for the time
absent. For this purpose a statutory declaration will be sufficient.
(7) Employees with Less than One Year’s Service:
This clause shall not apply to employees with less than one year’s
continuous service and the general obligation on employers
should be no more
than to give relevant employees an indication of the impending redundancy at the
first reasonable opportunity,
and to take such steps as may be reasonable to
facilitate the obtaining by the employees of suitable alternative
employment.
Note: Clause 4.2 – Consultation Before Termination of the
Termination, Change and Redundancy General Order applies to all employees
regardless of their length of continuous service.
(8) Employees Exempted:
This clause shall not apply where employment is terminated as a consequence
of conduct that justifies summary dismissal, or in the
case of casual employees,
apprentices, or employees engaged for a specific period of time or for a
specific task or tasks.
(9) Incapacity to Pay:
An employer, in a particular redundancy case, may make an application to
the Western Australian Industrial Relations Commission to
have the general
severance pay prescription varied on the basis of the employer’s
incapacity to pay.
22. - BOARD OF REFERENCE
(1) The Commission hereby appoints, for the purposes of this award, a Board
of Reference consisting of a Chairman and two other members
who shall be
appointed pursuant to Regulation 16 of the Industrial Commission Regulations,
(2) The Board of Reference is hereby assigned the function of allowing,
approving, fixing, determining or dealing with any matter
of difference between
the parties in relation to any matter which, under this award, may be allowed,
approved, fixed, determined
or dealt with by a Board of Reference.
CLAUSE DELETED
31. - ENTERPRISE AGREEMENT
(1) (a) Where an agreement is reached between the employer, the employees
and the union concerning the working arrangements to be
followed within the
respondent employer’s factory, workshop, department or section thereof the
provisions of this award may
be varied in any manner as agreed.
(b) The union will not unreasonably withhold agreement to the alternative
working arrangements.
(2) (a) An enterprise agreement shall not act to increase the ordinary
hours of work beyond an average of 38 hours per week; reduce
the quantum of
annual leave, sick leave, maternity leave, public holidays and long service
(b) Where any agreement concluded under subclause (1) hereof affects award
conditions the parties shall jointly support such agreement
before the Western
Australian Industrial Relations Commission for registration as an appendix to
(3) The following procedures shall apply in the formation of any agreement
negotiated under the terms of this clause:
(a) The proposed variations for each workplace or part thereof shall be
explained to the employees concerned and written notification
of proposals will
be placed on the notice board at the worksite and sent to the union.
(b) The employer and affected employees will then consult with each other
on the changes with a view to reaching agreement.
The union will be notified in writing of the proposed variations prior to
any change taking place.
CLAUSE DELETED
APPENDIX - RESOLUTION OF DISPUTES REQUIREMENTS
(1) This Appendix is inserted into the award/industrial agreement as a
result of legislation which came into effect on 16 January
1996 (Industrial
Relations Legislation Amendment and Repeal Act 1995) and further varied by
legislation which came into effect on
23 May 1997 (Labour Relations Legislation
Amendment Act 1997).
(2) Any dispute or grievance procedure in this award/industrial agreement
shall also apply to any questions, disputes or difficulties
which may arise
With effect from 22 November 1997 the dispute or grievance procedures in
this award/industrial agreement is hereby varied to include
the requirement that
persons involved in the question, dispute or difficulty will confer among
themselves and make reasonable attempts
to resolve questions, disputes or taking
those matters to the Commission.
APPENDIX DELETED
SCHEDULE 1 - PARTIES TO THE AWARD
The following organisation is a party to this award:
The Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union of Workers
NO VARIATIONS
SCHEDULE 2 - RESPONDENTS
Anderson Industries Pty. Ltd., 3 Roydhouse Street, Subiaco.
E.D.U. Concrete Co., 97 Guildford Road, Bassendean.
Formica Ceilings, 195 Welshpool Road, Queens Park.
Geraldton Building Co. Pty. Ltd., Ocean Street, Geraldton.
H.B. Brady Co. Pty Ltd., Bayswater Henderson Modelling Workers,
Bourke Street, Bunbury.
Lite-Ceil Modelling Works, McCoy Street, Melville.
Midceil Moulding Supply, 19 Wildon Street, Bellevue
Modern Ceilings, Victoria Road, Malaga.
New Cement Co., 78 Goodwood Parade, Rivervale.
Placor Plaster Products, 288 Gnangara Road, Landsdale.
Plasterceil Modelling Workers, Beechboro Road, Bayswater.
Plasterline Industries, 16 King Edward Road, Osborne Park.
R. Galvin, Sundercombe Street, Osborne Park.
Regal Cement Works, 22 Sussex Street, Maylands.
Savage Plaster Pty Ltd, 10 Collingwood Street, Osborne Park.
Superb Ceilings, 19 Winchester Road, Spearwood.
Swan Concrete Works, 22 Hines Road, Hilton Park.
Welshpool Concrete Products , 21 Kew Street, Welshpool.
SCHEDULE 2 - RESPONDENTS
Anderson Industries Pty. Ltd. (now deregistered).
E.D.U. Concrete Co., 97 Guildford Road, Bassendean.
Formica Ceilings Pty Ltd (defunct state company).
Geraldton Building Co. Pty. Ltd. (now deregistered).
H.B. Brady Co. Pty Ltd. (now deregistered).
Henderson Modelling Workers, Bourke Street, Bunbury.
Wallis Enterprises Pty Ltd formerly known as Lite-Ceil Pty Ltd t/as
Lite-Ceil Plaster Works, McCoy Street, Melville.
Mid-ceil Moulding Supplies, 19 Wildon Street, Bellevue.
Fording Bridge Nominees Pty Ltd formerly known as Modern Ceilings Pty Ltd
t/a Modern Ceilings, Victoria Road, Malaga.
New Cement Co.Pty Ltd (now deregistered).
Placor Plaster Products, 288 Gnangara Road, Landsdale.
Plasterceil Pty Ltd t/as Plasterceil Modelling Workers (now deregistered).
Plasterline Industries, 16 King Edward Road, Osborne Park.
R. Galvin (decd).
Regal Cement Manufacturers Pty Ltd t/as Regal Cement Works, 22 Sussex
Street, Maylands.
Savage Plaster Pty Ltd (now deregistered).
Superb Ceilings Pty Ltd, 19 Winchester Road, Spearwood. Swan Concrete Works
Pty Ltd (now deregistered).
Hydraplant Equipment Pty Ltd previously known as Welshpool Concrete
Products Pty Ltd (now deregistered).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (896 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter