URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WASAT/2025/116.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:06:49
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
TAN and MAXIMILLIAN PTY LTD t/as BAILIWICK LEGAL [2025] WASAT 116 (21 October 2025)
STATE ADMINISTRATIVE
LEGAL PROFESSION UNIFORM LAW (WA)
TAN and MAXIMILLIAN PTY LTD t/as BAILIWICK LEGAL
PRESIDENT GLANCY
DETERMINED ON THE DOCUMENTS
DELIVERED :
21 OCTOBER 2025
FILE NO/S :
VR 29 of 2025
MAXIMILLIAN PTY LTD t/as BAILIWICK LEGAL
Costs - Application for an extension of time to
apply for assessment of bill of costs - Whether just and fair to extend time -
applicant is self-represented - Turns on own facts
Legislation:
Bush Fires Act 1954
Profession Act 2008
(WA) (repealed),
Legal Profession Uniform Law (WA)
Legal Profession Uniform Law Application Act 2022
State Administrative Tribunal Act 2004
Application granted
Representation:
Mr P Brunner
Solicitors:
Bailiwick Legal
Case(s) referred to in decision(s):
Bridge Shipping Pty Ltd v Grand Shipping SA
[1991] HCA 45
(1991) 173 CLR 231
Kaya and WA Summit Lawyers
[2025] WASAT 22
Monopak Pty Ltd v Maxim Litigation Consultants
[2007] WASC 112
FOR DECISION OF THE TRIBUNAL
Introduction
Brunner is a legal practitioner. Through his incorporated legal practice, of
which he is the sole director, he provided legal
services to Ms Tan in mid -
late 2023. Ms Tan was not happy with the service provided and was not happy
with the bill which she
received for those services.
Tan wishes to have her bill of costs dated 9 May 2023 assessed. She did not
seek to do so within the time period provided in
s 198(3) of the
Profession Uniform Law (WA)
). Ms Tan seeks an
order from the Tribunal granting leave to have her bill of costs assessed in the
Supreme Court, which the Tribunal
may grant pursuant to s 198(4) of the Uniform
the materials filed in support of her application, Ms Tan makes numerous
allegations about the conduct of Mr Brunner, or his firm,
which she says amount
to breaches of various ethical obligations. This is not the place for
those matters to be considered. Indeed,
it appears from the materials
filed in this application that Ms Tan reported her concerns to the Legal
Practice Board and, according
to the material before me, ultimately determined
that she did not wish to pursue a complaint against the practitioner or the
the reasons that follow I have determined that it is appropriate to:
the amendment of the named respondent from Philip Brunner to Maximillian Pty Ltd
t/as Bailiwick Legal; and
Ms Tan to have her bill of costs dated 9 May 2023 (Invoice 003618) assessed
in the Supreme Court.
Procedure/Determination on the documents
20 May 2025 I held a directions hearing in order to programme Ms Tan's
application to resolution.
20 May 2025 I made orders that:
June 2025 the applicant was to file and give to the respondent any evidence and
written submissions on which she intended to
June 2025, the respondent was to file and give to the applicant any evidence on
affidavit and any written submissions on which
it intended to
1 July 2025 the applicant lodge with the Tribunal and give to the respondent any
materials, including submissions in reply; and
to further order of the Tribunal, the matter would be determined on the basis of
the documents pursuant to
State Administrative Tribunal Act
have determined this application on the documents pursuant to s 60(2) of
the SAT Act.
documents to which I have had regard in determining Ms Tan's application
Application
dated 3 April 2025;
of Yenny Tan dated 4 April 2025;
Supplementary
affidavit of Yenny Tan dated 3 June 2025;
Applicant's
written submissions dated 4 June 2025;
Applicant's
written submissions in reply dated 2 July 2025;
of Philip George Brunner sworn 24 June 2025; and
Respondent's
written submissions dated 24 June 2025.
Amendment of the respondent's name
her application Ms Tan named Mr Brunner as the respondent. She now applies to
amend the name of the respondent to Maximillian
Pty Ltd t/as Bailiwick Legal.
Brunner asserted that he has never been engaged by the applicant to provide
legal services and has never provided legal services
to the applicant in his
personal capacity.
He says that the application to amend the name of the respondent from Philip
Brunner to the name of the incorporated legal practice
of which he is the sole
director, Maximillian Pty Ltd t/as Bailiwick Legal, ought to be dismissed
Tan intended to commence the action against him in his personal capacity;
Tan had never been misled as to the entity which had provided her with legal
Tan has not led any evidence that she notified Maximillian Pty Ltd t/as
Bailiwick Legal of the request to have it made the respondent
proceedings; and
Tribunal's power to exercise the discretion to amend the name of a party, if a
power exists (which he does not concede) is to
be exercised only as suggested by
the High Court in
Bridge Shipping Pty Ltd v Grand Shipping SA
[1991] HCA 45
(1991) 173 CLR 231.
my view, it would have been obvious to Mr Brunner, from the application dated 3
April 2025, that Ms Tan wished to have the bill
of costs dated 9 May 2023
assessed in the Supreme Court. It is not reasonable to say, as he does, that
the amendment should not
be permitted because the applicant has not given notice
to the legal practice of her request to have it named as the respondent.
Brunner is the Managing Director of the practice. Contrary to the respondent's
submission, no procedural fairness is denied
to the legal practice by the
proposed amendment. Mr Brunner had notice of the directions hearing of 20 May
2025 and the proposed
amendment of the name of the respondent has not prevented
Mr Brunner from having an opportunity to resist Ms Tan's application for
order permitting her to proceed to have her bill of costs assessed in the
Supreme Court. Indeed Mr Brunner had an opportunity
to, and did, file
submissions in opposition to both the application to amend and the substantive
application.
and in any event, the Tribunal is not a court and, pursuant to s 9 of the
SAT Act, is not bound by legal technicalities
and must determine matters fairly
and according to the substantial merits of the case. In the circumstances of
this case, preventing
the Tribunal from considering the merits of Ms Tan's
substantive application would be solely based on a technicality.
those circumstances, even if I do not accept Ms Tan's explanation for naming Mr
Brunner as the respondent - being confusion generated
by the firm's documents -
amendment in order to allow
the merits of the application to be determined.
the directions hearing on 20 May 2025, I asked Mr Brunner to identify the proper
name of his firm so that I could make an order
permitting the amendment of the
respondent's name. In my view this should have been a simple matter given that
Mr Brunner knew the
name of the incorporated legal practice and knew what Ms Tan
was seeking to achieve by her application. In my view, he ought to
assisted his former client and the Tribunal by simply advising of the firm's
name and agreeing to an amendment. Instead, Mr
Brunner refused to inform me,
despite repeated requests, of the correct name of the firm so that the
respondent could be properly
named because, he said, he had no instructions
from the firm to provide its name to the Tribunal. In subsequent written
submissions,
he took issue with the amendment for the reasons I have set out
above. I have found Mr Brunner's approach unhelpful and unnecessary,
particularly given that he is the director of the firm, was aware of Ms Tan's
intentions and was to be given the opportunity to provide
submissions and
evidence in opposition to the substantive application, and because the firm's
correct name was in fact on the bottom
of correspondence received by Ms Tan
which was filed in this proceeding.
the circumstances, it is appropriate to permit the amendment to be made so that
the merits of Ms Tan's application can be considered.
turn then to deal with the substantive application for leave to proceed to have
the bill of costs dated 9 May 2023 assessed in
the Supreme Court.
Legal principles
198 of the Uniform Law, which applies in WA as a consequence of
Legal Profession Uniform Law Application Act 2022
Application
), deals with applications for costs assessments. That section provides
as follows:
Applications
for costs assessment
(1) Applications for an
assessment of the whole or any part of legal costs payable to a law practice may
be made by any of the following—
(a) a client who has paid or is liable to pay them to the law practice;
(b) a third party payer who has paid or is liable to pay them to the law
practice or the client;
(c) the law practice;
(d) another law practice, where the other law practice retained the law
practice to act on behalf of a client and the law practice
has given the other
law practice a bill for doing so.
(2) An application under this section is to be made in accordance with
applicable jurisdictional legislation.
(3) An application under this section must be made within 12 months
(a) the bill was given to, or the request for payment was made to, the
client, third party payer or other law practice; or
(b) the legal costs were paid if neither a bill nor a request was made.
(4) However, an application that is made out of time may be dealt with by the
costs assessor if the designated tribunal, on application
by the costs assessor
or the client or third party payer who made the application for assessment,
determines, after having regard
to the delay and the reasons for the delay, that
it is just and fair for the application for assessment to be dealt with after
12-month period.
(5) Subsection (4) does not apply to an application made out of time by a
third party payer who is not a commercial or government
client but who would be
a commercial or government client if the third party payer were a client of the
law practice concerned.
(6) If the third party payer is a non-associated third party payer, the law
practice concerned must provide the third party payer,
on the written request of
the third party payer, with sufficient information to allow the third party
payer to consider making, and
if thought fit to make, an application for a costs
assessment under this section.
(7) If an application for a costs assessment is made in accordance with this
(a) the costs assessment must take place without any money being paid into
court on account of the legal costs the subject of the
application; and
(b) the law practice must not commence any proceedings to recover the legal
costs until the costs assessment has been completed.
(8) A costs assessor is to cause a copy of an application for a costs
assessment to be given to any law practice or client concerned
or any other
person whom the costs assessor thinks it appropriate to notify.
(9) A person who is notified by the costs assessor under subsection
(a) is entitled to participate in the costs assessment process; and
(b) is taken to be a party to the assessment; and
(c) if the costs assessor so determines, is bound by the assessment.
(10) If there is a non-associated third party payer for a client of a law
practice, then, despite any other provision of this Division,
the assessment of
the costs payable by the non-associated third party payer does not affect the
amount of legal costs payable by
the client to the law practice.
the Uniform Law, the State Administrative Tribunal is the designated tribunal
for the purposes of s 198(4). Before the Uniform
Law came into operation in
Western Australia, assessment of bills of costs were provided for under Part 10
of Division 8 of the
Legal Profession Act 2008
Applications for assessment of bills of costs by a client were provided for in s
295 of that Act. Section 295(2) permitted a
client to apply to a taxing
officer for an assessment of the whole or a part of a bill for legal costs.
Section 295(6) provided
that an application for assessment had to be made
within 12 months after the bill was given in accordance with Division 7, or
request for payment was made to the client, or of the costs being paid if
neither a bill was given nor a request for payment made
and s 295(7) permitted
applications to be made out of time (other than for a sophisticated client) if
the Supreme Court determined,
after having regard to the delay and the reasons
for the delay, that it is just and fair for the application for assessment to be
dealt with after the 12 month
295(7) of the LP Act provided that an application to assess costs out of time
could be dealt with by a taxing officer if
the Supreme Court determined, after
having regard to the delay and the reasons for delay, that it was just and fair
for the costs
to be assessed.
Accordingly,
while the Tribunal now determines whether an application for assessment of a
bill of costs can be dealt with by the
Supreme Court, the test which is applied
in the Tribunal is the same as that which was applied by the Supreme Court in
determining
such applications under the LP Act.
onus is on the applicant to persuade the Tribunal that it is just and fair for
the application for assessment to be made out
Kaya and WA Summit
identified the Supreme Court decisions which provided guidance on how the
Tribunal's discretion is to be exercised. Those cases
identified the purpose of
the provision and the factors to which regard is to be had when
exercising it. The statutory purpose of
the equivalent provision in the LP
Act was said to be 'to provide machinery to protect a client against excessive
charges by a practitioner,
to ensure clients can be satisfied that bills of
costs are not excessive and to impose time limits to prevent clients from
taking advantage of the provisions to delay the obligation to pay
proper costs and to avoid frivolous
objections'.
that case I found, as I do here, that the principles and considerations
identified in the Supreme Court cases are apposite to
determination by the
Tribunal of whether to grant leave under the Uniform Law.
while the discretion is unfettered, particular regard must be had to both the
length of the delay and the reasons for the delay.
Additionally, consideration
will be given to:
there is evidence suggesting the bill might be excessive;
the refusal to enlarge time might result in an injustice;
nature and prejudice to the practitioner from any extension of time;
practitioner's reasons for opposing the enlargement. It is of importance that,
as an officer of the court, he be seen to be acting
honestly, ethically and with
proper motives and that he is not acting merely to prevent taxation of the bill
deciding whether to exercise the discretion it will generally be the case that
more latitude is given to a client who is not
a 'sophisticated client'.
Ultimately,
the question requires the exercise of a broad discretion to ensure that the
interests of justice are properly administered.
this case I am satisfied on the balance of probabilities of the following
matters and make the findings of fact set out at [28]
to [34] from the materials
Brunner is a director of Maximillian Pty Ltd which trades as Bailiwick
April 2023, Ms Tan engaged what she regarded to be the services of Mr Brunner to
finalise oral submissions for a Fair Work case
in which she was then
bill of costs which she seeks to have taxed was issued on 9 May 2023
for the sum of $16,084.20.
time between the issue of the bill of costs and the commencement of this
proceeding was just short of 2 years.
of that sum was taken from trust funds which Ms Tan had paid into Bailiwick
Legal's trust account.
Tan made a complaint to the Legal Practice Board about the bill of costs and Mr
Brunner's conduct.
November 2023 Ms Tan had been advised by the Legal Practice Board
the matter had not been able to be resolved through mediation she could apply to
the Supreme Court for a costs assessment;
could revisit her complaint about Mr Brunner's conduct within a three year
period as provided for under the Application
Tan says that in late 2023 and early 2024 she was engaged in other legal
proceedings which ultimately necessitated her appealing
a conviction to the
Supreme Court in 2025.
also says that she was confused about her entitlement to have the bill of costs
assessed because she thought, from the Legal
Practice Board's reference to the
complaint being able to be brought within three years, that she had three years
to apply for the
assessment of the bill of
1 November 2023 Ms Tan sent an email to an officer of the Legal Practice Board
Dear [redacted]
I refer to our telephone conversation last Thursday and I advise that I wish to
withdraw my complaint against Mr Brunner/Bailiwick
Legal, for now. I will
proceed with the filing of an application for costs assessment in the Supreme
Kind regards
email of 6 November 2023 from the Legal Practice Board to Ms Tan
Thank you for your response on 1 November 2023, and as I have mentioned during
our telephone conversation on 24 October 2023, you
may revisit this complaint at
a later date noting the 3 year limit on the Board investigating a lawyer's
conduct, you will be required
to provided detailed information to support the
allegations made against Mr Brunner.
Legal Profession Uniform Law Application Act 2022
(WA) (Uniform Law),
I require confirmation whether you agree in closing the complaint for now, on
the basis of an informal resolution.
A yes or no response would suffice. Much
appreciated.
Kind regards
[redacted] Resolution Officer
Tan says that this confusion and her involvement in other legal proceedings at
the time explains and justifies her delay.
Tan says that Mr Brunner's breaches of his fiduciary duties and the substandard
service she received justify the extension of
time she seeks. She says that the
issues have caused her significant financial and professional detriment and that
the delay in
pursuing a costs assessment has been exacerbated by the lack of
adequate disclosure and transparency on Mr Brunner's part.
Tan says that she has been unemployed since May 2022 and has had to rely on
savings to cover her living expenses. She also says
that in July 2022, she
was diagnosed as having Bell's Palsy which prolonged her Fair Work legal
proceeding and that she suffered
as a result of 'unlawful enforcement of fines
by the Fines Enforcement Registry and Sherriff's office'. She says that the
and emotional toll on her affected her ability to initiate a costs
assessment within the statutory
Tan also says that towards the end of 2022 she was also contending with three
infringement notices which she received under the
Bush Fires Act 1954
was approximately 11 months after the one-year period provided for in the
Uniform Law
that Ms Tan brought her application to the Tribunal. It was
also more than a year after Ms Tan informed the Legal Practice Board
would proceed with filing an application for the assessment of costs in the
Supreme Court.
I accept that Ms Tan was engaged in multiple legal matters after the bill of
costs was issued, I do not accept that that alone
provides an adequate
explanation for the delay of approximately 17 months from 1 November 2023,
the time she told the Legal Practice
Board that she would proceed with an
application to have the bill of costs assessed, and the filing of the
application on 3 April
2025. It would not have been a difficult or
time-consuming matter to bring such an application, particularly for Ms Tan who,
a litigant in person, clearly by then had some experience as a litigant
in various courts.
Tan says, though, that her financial hardship and her illness, combined with the
focus on the other legal matters in which she
was then involved, contributed to
Tan did not expressly claim in her affidavit that financial hardship prevented
her from filing within time an application to have
her bill of costs taxed.
However, the fact that she refers to financial hardship suggests that it
contributed to the delay. I do
not consider the claimed financial hardship
provides a strong justification for the grant of leave. Although Ms Tan refers
unemployed, she also stated that she was able to provide for her needs
by redrawing from her mortgage and therefore had access to
some funds. Further,
Ms Tan did not say that she had applied for and had been refused fee relief and
that she was therefore financially
unable to bring her application.
Tan also says that the inconsistent use of ABNs and business identifiers in the
firm's documents should be taken into account
in resolving her application
because it has potential implications for legal responsibility, trust accounting
and client transparency.
In my view, confusion arising from the inability to
identify the proper name in which to bring the application in the Tribunal was
relevant only to the issue of whether the name of the respondent should be
amended, because it has not been said that it caused Ms
Tan to be unable to
bring the application to have her costs taxed at all. She could have, within
time, commenced the application
naming Mr Brunner as the respondent as she did
in April 2025. Further, Ms Tan did not say that these inconsistencies
contributed
to delay in commencing the application.
I do not accept that financial hardship provides a reasonable basis for the
delay, I do accept that illness and the fact that
she was dealing with numerous
other legal matters as a litigant-in-person to be reasonable explanations for
Brunner did not claim that, or provide any evidence of prejudice that he or the
legal practice would suffer if the assessment
of the bill of costs were to
proceed out of time. From that, I am satisfied and find that there is no
greater prejudice to the respondent
if the bill of costs is assessed than a lack
of finality or certainty as to its affairs which is always the case where a bill
costs is to be assessed out of time.
bill, for two days' work involving finalisation of what were intended to be oral
closing submissions for use in Ms Tan's Fair
Work proceedings, was for an amount
of $16,084.20.
While I have no doubt that the need to provide closing submissions for a matter
in respect of which the legal practice had not previously
been involved would
have required considerable work and, in my preliminary view, and without
determining the issue, $16,084.20 seems
on its face to be a very large
that I apprehend that the relevant bill of costs may have been excessive, and
that there is no real prejudice to the respondent
in proceeding to have it
assessed, even though I am not persuaded that the reason for the delay is
particularly strong, I am nevertheless
satisfied on balance, given that the
practitioner's firm has been on notice since the bill was issued that Ms Tan was
of the view
that it was not justified and had been seeking to dispute it, that
it is just and fair to extend the time within which Ms Tan can
assessment of the costs claimed in invoice 003618 dated 9 May 2023 in the
Supreme Court.
make the following orders:
name of the respondent is amended from Philip Brunner to Maximillian Pty Ltd
t/as Bailiwick Legal; and
to s 198(4) of the
Legal Profession Uniform Law
(WA) the application
for an assessment of costs in relation to invoice 003618 dated 9
May 2023 is granted, notwithstanding it was
made out of time.
certify that the preceding paragraph(s) comprise the reasons for decision of the
State Administrative Tribunal.
Associate to the Hon Justice Glancy
21 OCTOBER 2025
Affidavit of
Philip George Brunner sworn 24 June 2025, para
Respondent's
Submissions dated 24 June 2025, pages 5 - 7, paras 21 -
There is no
apparent policy reason for the conferral on the Tribunal in s 198(4) of the
discretion to allow or refuse to allow applications
for assessments of costs,
which are undertaken by the Supreme Court, to be determined by the Tribunal. As
I stated in
Kaya and WA Summit Lawyers
[2025] WASAT 22
and WA Summit Lawyers
), while a matter of policy, it is my view
that Parliament should consider amending the Uniform Law to nominate the Supreme
as the relevant tribunal for the purpose of the exercise of the discretion
to allow costs assessments to proceed out of time to restore
the position to
that which existed before the National Law came into
Kaya and WA Summit Lawyers
, [17] - [24].
Pty Ltd v Maxim Litigation Consultants
[2007] WASC 112
Affidavit of
Yenny Tan dated 4 April 2025, para
Affidavit of
Yenny Tan dated 4 April 2025, para 8 and page
Affidavit of
Yenny Tan dated 4 April 2025, paras 9 and
of Yenny Tan dated 4 April 2025, page
of Yenny Tan dated 4 April 2025, page
Supplementary Affidavit of Yenny Tan dated 3 June 2025, paras 4.5 -
Affidavit of Yenny Tan dated 4 April 2025, page 280.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (212 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter