URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WASC/2025/473.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:07:38
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
KANOWNA MINES PTY LTD -v- GRANGE RESOURCES LTD [2025] WASC 473 (11 November 2025)
COURT OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
MINES PTY LTD -v- GRANGE RESOURCES LTD
[2025] WASC 473
OCTOBER 2025
DELIVERED :
NOVEMBER 2025
CIV 1574 of 2025
MINES PTY LTD
RESOURCES LTD
ROYALTY AUSTRALIA PTY LTD
and procedure - Discovery - Whether categories of discovery sought by plaintiff
are relevant to issues in proceedings - Case
management considerations - Turns
on own facts
Legislation:
of the Supreme Court 1971
Plaintiff's
application for discovery against first defendant
Further submissions as to
the orders to be made in relation to second defendant
Representation:
First Defendant
S Penglis SC & B
Solicitors:
Allen Overy Shearman
First Defendant
Clayton Utz
referred to in decision:
these proceedings, the parties have agreed that discovery should be given by way
of categories. As a consequence, on 16 October
2025, I ordered that the
parties give discovery of 23 agreed categories. At that time, several of
the categories sought by the plaintiff
from the defendants remained in dispute.
Orders were made on 16 October 2025 programming the hearing of the disputed
categories through
to a hearing on 30 October 2025.
the interim, the disputed categories were narrowed further. Ultimately, at the
hearing on 30 October 2025, Kanowna Mines Pty Ltd
(Kanowna) sought
discovery of only one additional category of documents from the first defendant,
Grange Resources Ltd (Grange) (category
14A), and three categories from the
second defendant, Vox Royalty Australia Pty Ltd (Vox) (categories 3A, 18,
and 19). At the hearing,
senior counsel for Vox withdrew the objection to
category 3A.
the reasons that follow, I have concluded that the orders for discovery sought
by Kanowna should not be made. In my view, category
14A is not relevant to
the issues in the proceedings. In relation to categories 18 and 19, in my
view, these categories as presently
drafted are too broad. I will hear from the
plaintiff and second defendant before making any orders in relation to these
categories.
Legal principles
principles governing discovery in the commercial and managed cases (CMC) list of
this court were broadly in agreement between
the parties.
essence, these can be summarised as
(a) The power of the court to make orders for discovery under O 26 of the
Rules of the Supreme Court 1971
(Rules) confers a discretion on the court to make an order for discovery of
Documents which are relevant to the issues in the proceedings are those that
either advance a party's case or damage their opponent's
case, or lead to a
train of inquiry that would either advance a party's case or damage their
(b) The court's discretion is to be exercised having regard to the timely and
cost-effective disposal of litigation.
(c) Discovery is an essential part of the administration of justice. The
ultimate test is whether the discovery sought is necessary
to fairly dispose of
proceedings.
(d) Orders for discovery in the CMC list of this court are usually restricted to
discovery of documents that are directly relevant
to an issue. It remains open
to parties to apply for orders for discovery of specific classes or categories
of documents that directly
or indirectly enable that party to advance their case
or damage their opponent's
(e) In determining what classes of documents are relevant, the court must
consider the pleadings together with the conduct and the
nature of the action. A
general pleading in defence, such as a mere denial, does not, of itself, enable
an order to be made which
would have the effect of widening the net of
(f) In deciding what orders to make, the court must consider the cost to the
parties and whether the discovery sought is proportionate
to the value,
importance, and complexity of the subject matter in dispute and the financial
position of the parties. In the absence
of evidence, it is difficult for the
court to make a proper assessment of
proportionality.
Summary of pleadings
claims against the defendants arise as a consequence of two events that occurred
on 12 September 2023. On that date, Grange
gave notice to Kanowna of its
intention to sell its interests under a royalty deed to Vox, and, shortly
afterwards, sold these interests
to Vox as part of a sale of a portfolio of
royalty interests for $8 million and the provision of Royalty Search
Support Services
(defined in [32] of the Amended Statement of Claim (Statement
of Claim)).
says that Grange's conduct was in breach of its obligations under cl 7.1
and cl 7.2 of a royalty deed entered into on 29
January 2002 (as
amended on 28 December 2007) (Royalty Deed). These clauses entitled Grange
to assign its obligations under the Royalty
Deed to any third party provided
(a) it first advised Kanowna of the full details of the proposed terms of the
assignment (cl 7.1(a));
(b) the proposed assignee entered into a deed covenanting to be bound by the
terms and conditions of the Royalty Deed (cl 7.1(b));
(c) if the entire consideration for the proposed assignment was cash or the cash
value could be readily ascertained, Grange first
offered to assign the royalty
to Kanowna for the same consideration and on the same terms and conditions. If
this offer was not accepted
within 15 business days, Grange could then
assign the royalty to a third party for that same consideration and on the same
conditions (cl 7.2).
says that Grange did not provide it with full details nor sufficient notice of
the proposed assignment of the royalty to
Vox. In relation to the alleged breach
of cl 7.2, Kanowna pleads that by no later than 29 July 2023, Grange
had ascertained the cash
value of the proposed assignment, alternatively at all
material times, the cash value was readily ascertainable, but did not offer
assign the royalty to Kanowna for the same consideration and on the same terms
and conditions.
way of relief, Kanowna seeks declarations as to the proper construction of the
Royalty Deed, that Grange has breached its obligations
under the Royalty Deed,
and the deed of assignment of the royalty to Vox is void. In the alternative,
Kanowna seeks damages for Grange's
breach of the Royalty Deed.
denies it has breached any obligations under the Royalty Deed and says that its
conduct satisfied its obligations to Kanowna
under cl 7.1 of the Royalty
Deed. It says that on the proper construction of its agreement with Vox, Grange
assigned its interests
in a number of royalty deeds and that no amount was
allocated to Vox's purchase of the royalty under the Royalty Deed. It also says
that the consideration for the assignment of its interest in the Royalty Deed
was not readily ascertainable.
Vox denies there has been any breach of the Royalty Deed or that Kanowna is
entitled to the relief sought.
Should any orders for discovery be made against
is only one disputed category of documents Kanowna seeks from Grange, namely
category 14A. This category seeks discovery
Documents (including correspondence) made between 12 September 2023 and 12
September 2024 for the purposes of financial advice, financial
reporting, tax
advice (excluding legal advice), tax reporting or tax lodgement in connection
with the sale of the Royalty Interests.
says this category is relevant to two issues in the proceedings. First, the
question of whether the cash value of the entire
consideration for the proposed
assignment of the royalty to Vox was readily ascertainable. Second, whether
Grange valued the Royalty
contended by
or was valuable consideration (as contended by
says the obligation in cl 7.2 of the Royalty Deed was triggered if the cash
value of the consideration for the Royalty Deed
was readily ascertainable. In
its submission, this did not require Grange to have actually ascertained the
cash value; it was sufficient
if Grange was capable of doing so. Kanowna says
the financial documents it seeks in category 14A are relevant to the
question as
to whether Grange (or its agents) assigned a cash value to the
Royalty Deed from the consideration it received from Vox for the purposes
'accounting for and/or calculating (for example) income, profit or capital gains
tax'. It says it is the fact that the cash value
of the assignment of the
Royalty Deed could be ascertained and not the date any calculation occurred that
renders this category of
documents relevant.
denies category 14A is relevant to any issue in the proceedings. In its
submission, the question as to whether Grange was
in breach of its obligations
under the Royalty Deed is to be determined as at the date of the alleged breach.
On this basis, it contends
that the only documents that are relevant are those
that were in existence at the date of the
drew attention to its agreement to give discovery of documents relevant to the
question as to whether the cash value of the
consideration was readily
ascertainable. In its submission, the documents sought by Kanowna are captured
by the agreed discovery
categories, as well as documents already discovered by
it in the pre-action discovery proceedings commenced by
addition, Grange says that, as presently drafted, category 14A is too
broad, and would require discovery of documents which are
commercially sensitive
with, at best, only limited forensic utility.
agree with this submission and, for the following reasons, do not consider that
an order should be made to require Grange to discover
documents falling within
category 14A.
the question as to whether
the obligation in
cl 7.2 of the Royalty Deed has been breached is to be assessed as the date
of the alleged breach. In its statement
of claim, Kanowna has specially referred
to a number of internal valuations of the royalty under the Royalty Deed
obtained by
as well as an allocation of a portion of the proposed purchase price to the
Royalty Deed in the initial offer made by
All of these documents were in existence as at the date of the alleged breach of
the Royalty Deed and are, in my view, relevant to
the issues pleaded by Kanowna.
The documents sought in category 14A (if they exist) are not limited to
documents which existed as
at the date of the breach and captures any assessment
of the value of the Royalty Deed which occurred after the date of the alleged
breach. In my view, any documents of this nature (if they exist) are not
relevant to the issues to be determined in the proceedings.
there was no evidence before the court, nor was there any submission advanced by
the plaintiff, to support the contention
that Grange may have been required to
separately account for any consideration it received from the sale of its
interests under the
Royalty Deed. These interests were, in essence, a
contractual entitlement to the payment of royalties. Given this, the sale of
interests does not give rise to any capital gains tax obligation or, on
its face, any requirement for Grange to separately allocate
the consideration it
received for the sale of the Grange Royalty Portfolio to each contractual
in category 13, Grange has agreed to discover documents between
1 August 2021 and 12 September 2024 that relate to valuations
estimates of the value of any of the royalty interests that comprise the Grange
Royalty Portfolio. This category will require
Grange to discover any valuation
or estimate of the value of the royalty under the Royalty Deed which exists
between these dates.
In my view, this category encompasses the documents
required to be produced by Grange which are relevant to the issue of whether
consideration for the proposed assignment was readily ascertainable.
even if I were satisfied this category of documents might be relevant to the
issues in the proceedings, I would not, in the
exercise of my discretion, order
discovery of this category. This category would require the assessment of a
large number of financial
and taxation documents over two separate financial
years. In my view, it is not consistent with the case management considerations
set out in O 1 r 4A and 4B of the Rules to require this to occur in
relation to documents which are, at best, only adjectivally or
relevant. In my view, these documents are not necessary to fairly dispose of the
proceedings.
Should any orders for discovery be made against
the conclusion of the hearing, only two categories remained in dispute between
Kanowna and Vox, namely categories 18 and 19.
18 seeks discovery of:
Documents made between 1 August 2022 and 14 December 2023 comprising or
evidencing communications between Vox and Grange including
their respective
agents or Related Bodies Corporate that mention or relate to any of the
following (including where referenced by
another name, abbreviation or
initialisation):
(b) Northern Star Resources Limited;
(c) M27/57;
(d) the Red Hill Royalty Deed (including its amendment);
(e) the RSPA including its negotiation or amendment;
(f) the Grange Royalty Portfolio or any of the Royalty Deeds, the parties to the
Royalty Deeds, or the Royalty Interests that comprise
the Grange Royalty
(g) the Royalty Search Support Services;
(h) the Notice of Sale; and
(i) the Vox Assignment
19 seeks discovery of:
Documents including internal communications of Vox or of its Related Bodies
Corporate, or between any of the entities that are Related
Bodies Corporate of
Vox, made between 1 August 2022 and 14 December 2023, which mention or relate to
any of the terms listed in paragraph
says category 18 is relevant to a number of issues in these proceedings,
(a) whether the cash value of the consideration for the assignment of the
royalty can be readily ascertained;
(b) whether Grange breached cl 7 of the Royalty Deed;
(c) whether Vox had notice or knowledge of or involvement in Grange's purported
breach of cl 7 of the Royalty Deed; and
(d) whether Grange's purported assignment of the royalty to Vox is effective,
ineffective, or remains subject to the right of first
relation to category 19, Kanowna says this is relevant to Vox's knowledge of
Grange's purported breach of cl 7 of the Royalty
Deed. It says that
discovery of these internal communications will allow Kanowna to properly test
whether Vox was a bona fide purchaser
for value without notice, although it
accepts this is not expressly pleaded by
says neither of these categories should be ordered as the documents sought are
irrelevant and, in any event, the categories are
far too broad. It says that
Kanowna's pleaded case is based on the premise that the cash value of the
consideration for the proposed
assignment of the Royalty Deed by Grange to Vox
was readily ascertainable by Grange. On this basis, it says the only documents
are relevant are documents that record or disclose the value that Grange
ascribed to the consideration given for the Royalty Deed.
Vox has already agreed
to provide discovery of any documents in its possession which disclose this.
denies there is any issue in the proceedings as to whether or not the cash value
of the consideration was objectively 'readily
ascertainable'. For two reasons, I
do not accept this submission.
it is clear from [40] and [41] of the Statement of Claim that Kanowna pleads two
alternate cases. The first is that by no
later than 29 July 2023, the cash
value of the proposed assignment had been ascertained by Grange. This case
focuses on what Grange
knew as at 29 July 2023. The only documents that are
relevant to this plea are documents which establish Grange's knowledge as at
29 July 2023. In the alternative, Kanowna pleads that at all material
times, the cash value of the proposed assignment of the Royalty
Deed was readily
ascertainable. At present, the particulars to this alternative plea refer to the
conduct of both Grange and Vox,
and state that further particulars may be
provided after discovery and prior to trial. In my view, the documents that are
to this claim extend beyond Grange's knowledge and make documents
recording Vox's knowledge or view of the cash value of the proposed
of the Royalty Deed relevant and discoverable.
and in any event, Grange specifically pleads in its defence that the proper
construction of cl 7 of the Royalty Deed requires
the cash value to be
objectively 'readily
ascertainable'.
This is put in issue by Kanowna's reply. On this basis, I accept that the
question as to whether, on the proper construction of cl
7 of Royalty Deed,
the cash value was required to be readily ascertainable subjectively by Grange
or objectively is an issue to be
determined at trial. This, however, is a
question of the proper construction of the Royalty Deed. I accept that at
present, the plaintiff
does not plead an alternative case based on this
construction. Given this, I do not consider the documents sought by Kanowna are
relevant to this issue.
the basis of my conclusion in [
do not accept that Vox's obligations of discovery are limited to discovery of
any valuations (or similar documents) produced
that are in its possession.
However, this does not mean that orders should be made for discovery in terms of
category 18. This is
because this category has been drafted by reference to
key terms rather than the issues in the proceedings. In doing so, it goes
significantly beyond what is necessary or appropriate for a matter in the CMC
list of this court. At present, the only restriction
contained in the category
is the date range. Apart from this, it requires production of documents 'that
mention or relate' to any
of the nine matters set out in that category. By way
of example, it would require production of any document that mentioned Northern
Star Resources, as well all drafts of the RSPA, even if the amendments do not
relate to or concern the Royalty Deed.
preliminary view is that Vox should be required to discover documents between
1 August 2022 and 12 September 2023
(a) record or relate to the value or structure of the consideration given by Vox
in exchange for Grange's rights under the Royalty
(b) mention or relate to Kanowna's right of first refusal contained in cl 7.2 of
the Royalty
does not accept that there is any issue in these proceedings as to whether it
was a bona fide purchaser for value without notice.
In its submission, it does
not follow from its denial of [52] of the Statement of Claim that orders should
be made that would have
the effect of widening the ambit of discovery. In that
context, it is important to note that Kanowna pleads, and Vox admits, that
was aware of the terms of the Royalty Deed and Kanowna's rights pursuant to
cl 7. Given this admission, on the pleadings as they
currently stand, I
accept that whether Vox was a bona fide purchaser for value without notice is
not an issue that will require determination.
preliminary view is that Vox's internal documents may be relevant to the
question of whether the cash value of the proposed assignment
of the Royalty
Deed to Vox can be readily ascertained and whether the agreement between Grange
and Vox was structured so as to defeat
Kanowna's rights under cl 7 of the
Royalty Deed. However, I consider that these documents are likely to be captured
within the categories
set out at [
Conclusion and orders
these reasons, I do not consider that Grange should be ordered to provide any
additional categories of discovery.
relation to Vox, my preliminary view is that Vox should be ordered to provide
some further discovery but not in the terms proposed
by Kanowna. At the hearing,
I indicated that if this were the conclusion I reached, I would hear from the
parties before making any
orders. Once the parties have had an opportunity to
consider these reasons, I will hear from them as to the appropriate orders to
made which will finalise Kanowna's
application.
certify that the preceding paragraph(s) comprise the reasons for decision of the
Supreme Court of Western Australia.
Associate to the Honourable
Justice Hill
11 NOVEMBER 2025
[2013] WASC 78
Roe v Western
[2013] WASC 130
Lanco Resources Australia
Pty Ltd v Griffin Energy Group Pty Ltd
[2016] WASC
Technomin Australia Pty
Ltd v Xstrata Nickel Australasia Operations Pty Ltd
[2010] WASC 218
Association of Glass Bottle Manufacturers Ltd v Nettlefold
[1912] UKLawRpAC 45
Perpetual Trustees Co Ltd
v Burniston
[2012] WASC 26
Singh v Friedman
Cove House Illiquid
Investments DAC v YA Global Investments LP
[2018] WASC 349
Ibes Corp & Seas Sapfor Ltd v Momentum (Aust) Pty Ltd
International Pty Ltd v Barnes (No 2)
Statement of Claim [40], Particular
First defendant's Defence
Franklin Pty Ltd v Metcash
Trading Ltd
(2009) 76 NSWLR 603
[2009] NSWCA 407
Being CIV 2145 of
Statement of Claim [28] - [29],
Statement of Claim
Kanowna's submissions filed 23 October 2025
First defendant's Defence [9(d)(ii)(A)(1)].
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (186 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter