URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WASC/2025/468.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:07:47
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
THE STATE OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA -v- SHIELD [No 2] [2025] WASC 468 (7 November 2025)
COURT OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
STATE OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA -v- SHIELD [No 2]
[2025] WASC 468
OCTOBER 2025
DELIVERED :
NOVEMBER 2025
SO 6 of 2025
STATE OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
JACK SHIELD
Serious Offenders Act 2020
Application for restriction order - Whether the respondent is a high risk
serious offender - Whether unacceptable risk that
respondent will commit a
serious offence if not subject to restriction order - Whether necessary to make
a restriction order to ensure
adequate protection of the community - Whether
community can be adequately protected by supervision of the
Legislation:
Risk Serious Offenders Act 2020
Supervision
Representation:
Ms G Colborne
Ms R Keating
Solicitors:
State Solicitor's
Geoffrey Miller
referred to in decision(s):
OF CONTENTS
Introduction
reasons concern whether the respondent
) should be made the
subject of a restriction order under
High Risk Serious Offenders Act 2020
) and, if so, the nature
of the restriction order that should be made.
30 May 2025, at a preliminary hearing, Lemonis J ordered that
Mr Shield be examined pursuant to s 46(2) of the HRSO Act and that
be made subject to an interim supervision order (the
Interim Supervision
Shield has complied with the Interim Supervision Order since 11 June 2025
(when he was released from prison) without incident.
applicant (the
) has also applied
for an order that Mr Shield be made the subject of a restriction order
under the HRSO Act. That application remains
outstanding and was heard before
State's application is made pursuant to s 35 and s 48 of the HRSO
35(1) of the HRSO Act provides that the State may apply to the Supreme Court for
a restriction order in relation to 'a serious
offender under custodial sentence
who is not a serious offender under restriction'.
was not in issue that at the time the State's application was made
Mr Shield was a serious offender under custodial sentence in
whom the State may make an application.
48(1) of the HRSO Act provides that if the
court hearing a restriction order application finds that the offender is
a 'high risk serious offender', the court must make a continuing
detention order
in relation to the offender or, except as provided in s 29 of the HRSO Act,
make a supervision order.
State's restriction order application raises two principal issues. First, is Mr
Shield a high risk serious offender? Secondly,
if so, should the court make a
supervision order, or is a continuing detention order required to adequately
protect the community?
relation to the first issue, counsel for Mr Shield conceded that Mr Shield
was a high risk serious offender. As discussed in
greater detail below, I
consider that that concession was properly made and Mr Shield is a high
risk serious offender.
regard to the second issue: the order that should be made, the State's position
was that the court might be satisfied that the
community would be adequately
protected by a supervision order in similar terms to the Interim Supervision
Counsel for Mr Shield agreed and submitted that such an order would be
appropriate. For the reasons that follow, I consider that
such an order would
be appropriate and will make such an order.
When restriction orders may
be made under the HRSO Act
discussed the restriction orders that may be made under the HRSO Act and when
they are made in
of Western Australia v El Waly [No
I do not propose to repeat everything that I said there, but I will mention
three matters.
the legal principles regarding restriction order applications were considered by
the High Court in
v The State of Western
I have had regard to those principles in considering the State's
application.
s 7(3) of the HRSO Act requires me to have regard to the matters identified
in that section in considering whether Mr Shield
is a high risk serious
offender. I have had regard to those matters and discuss each of them
I respectfully agree with and adopt Tottle J's summary of the relevant
legal principles in
State of Western Australia v Clarke [No
An overview of the evidence
relied upon by the State
State relied on four books of documents that it filed in support of its
application and tendered at the hearing (under s 84(5)
of the HRSO Act)
without objection.
State also led oral evidence from four witnesses (who have each prepared written
reports that are relied upon by the
(a) Dr Peter Wynn Owen, a psychiatrist who has reviewed Mr Shield. Dr Wynn
Owen has extensive experience preparing reports for the
purposes of the HRSO
(b) Dr Ben Bannister, a psychologist who has reviewed Mr Shield. Dr
Bannister also has extensive experience preparing reports for
the purposes of
the HRSO Act;
(c) Mr Luke Carmichael, a HRSO Planning Manager at the Department of Justice who
has prepared a HRSO treatment options report in
respect of Mr Shield; and
(d) Ms Madi Tait, Mr Shield's Senior Community Corrections Officer who has
prepared a community supervision assessment report in
respect of Mr
Mr Shield's antecedents and
criminal record
HRSO Act requires me to have regard to Mr Shield's antecedents and criminal
record when considering whether or not he is a high
risk serious
Mr Shield's personal
Shield is 31 years old. He had a deprived childhood.
Shield's mother was an alcoholic. She also used and sold drugs. His father
died in a motor vehicle accident when he was 2 or
Shield was subject to domestic violence during his childhood. He suffered that
violence at the hands of both his mother and her
partner. He also witnessed his
mother being subjected to domestic violence by her partner. His mother's
substance abuse resulted
in him being
Shield started selling drugs he stole from his mother when he was 10. He ran
away from home on a number of
around the age of 13, Mr Shield stopped living with his mother and started
moving between relatives, hostels and juvenile detention.
He also experienced
Shield attended primary school but barely went to
He was diagnosed with attention deficit disorder
) in primary school but refused to
take the medication he was
prescribed.
attended high school but again missed school. He attended an agricultural
boarding school for years 7 to 9 but his schooling
was interrupted by youth
detention and
Shield has had a variety of jobs including working in supermarkets, as a
labourer on mine sites, as a tiler and in shearing
Shield has a partner who he has been living with since he was released from
prison in June 2025. They met while he was still
Shield has two children from a previous relationship. That relationship ended
after he was imprisoned in
Shield started using alcohol and marijuana at ages 10 or 11 and began taking
methamphetamine and heroin when he was around
Mr Shield was released from prison in 2015, he stopped taking methamphetamine
but started drinking heavily. Later, he returned
to methamphetamine use before
returning to prison in
Shield used opiates and methamphetamine in prison but started taking methadone
in 2021/2022. He has remained abstinent since
then and tapered off methadone
when he was released from
Mr Shield's criminal
Shield has an extensive criminal record that began in childhood and continued
into adulthood, including while he was in prison.
Mr Shield's offending
was characterised by a propensity to use violence and a willingness to use
weapons. In prison, he participated
in riots and was repeatedly involved in
assaulting prison guards and starting fires.
Shield's criminal record commenced when he was 15 (although he told Dr Wynn Owen
that he began offending when he was
Shield was first convicted in February 2010 at the age of 15. That conviction
was for stealing.
that year, in September 2010, Mr Shield was convicted of disorderly conduct,
failing to provide details to the police, stealing,
aggravated assault
occasioning bodily harm and threats to
The aggravated assault and threats to kill involved Mr Shield repeatedly
punching his sister (who he was living with at the time)
and threatening to kill
following year, in June 2011, when Mr Shield was 16, he was convicted of
damaging property, breaching bail, two counts of attempted
aggravated armed
robbery, aggravated assault with intent to rob and three counts of aggravated
armed robbery. He was sentenced to
terms of detention with a total effective
sentence of 15 months backdated to 25 December
attempted aggravated armed robberies, aggravated armed robberies and the
aggravated assault with intent to rob charges involved
a series of muggings and
attempted muggings that Mr Shield committed in company with others at
night. Mr Shield was armed with a
knife during the robberies and attempted
The aggravated assault with intent to rob involved Mr Shield punching the victim
in the back of the head and then kicking and punching
him when he was on the
ground and robbing
the beginning of the next year, in January 2012, Mr Shield was convicted of
wilful damage, burglary, two counts of attempted armed
robbery and being armed
in a way that may cause fear. He was sentenced to terms of detention with a
total effective sentence of
20 months backdated to 16 January
burglary and attempted armed robbery charges involved an incident in the early
morning where Mr Shield broke into a shop in a
shopping centre, stole an axe and
damaged the shop. He then used the axe to attempt to rob two people. He also
approached a driver
and showed her the axe, causing her to drive
14 August 2014, Mr Shield was sentenced for the first time as an adult after
being convicted on indictment in the District Court
of aggravated robbery. He
was sentenced to 9 months
imprisonment.
incident involved Mr Shield pushing and then punching a shop assistant
repeatedly when he was caught shoplifting, injuring the
July 2015 and 7 December 2016, Mr Shield was convicted of various
offences in the Karratha Magistrates Court for which he
received fines. The
offences included carrying weapons, assaulting a police officer, damaging
property and making threats to
March 2019, Mr Shield was convicted in the Supreme Court of one count of
criminal damage by fire contrary to s 444(1)(a) of the
Criminal Code. He
received a term of imprisonment of 2 years and 6 months, concurrent
from 13 July
charge arose out of an incident in February 2018 whilst Mr Shield was a
remanded prisoner at Hakea prison when he climbed onto
the roof of a prison
block with another prisoner. They armed themselves with a broken broom handle
and bricks and refused to climb
down and made threats to harm others and
themselves. They also set fire to an air-conditioning unit on the
4 June 2019, Mr Shield was convicted in the District Court of one count of
grievous bodily harm. He received a term of imprisonment
of 14 months,
cumulative from 4 June
charge arose out of an incident that occurred in February 2017 (before the
previous charge) when Mr Shield assaulted someone
who walked past him on the
street in the early morning in Karratha. The assault was unprovoked and Mr
Shield appeared to have been
drunk at the
5 June 2019, Mr Shield was convicted of aggravated reckless driving, two counts
of assaulting a public officer, failing to stop
and driving without a driver's
licence. He received terms of imprisonment with a total effective sentence of
8 months, concurrent
from 5 June
charges of assaulting a public officer involved Mr Shield head butting one
police officer and attempting to punch
16 August 2019, Mr Shield was convicted of a further two counts of assaulting a
public officer. He was sentenced to further terms
of imprisonment with 7 months
to be served concurrently from 16 August 2019 and three months cumulatively
from 16 August
charges arose out of an incident where Mr Shield threw a jug of water at
two prison officers who were guarding him at Fiona
Stanley Hospital. He threw
the jug after he became angry when his bed was bumped. At the time he was a
prisoner at Casuarina
the start of the following year, on 3 February 2020, Mr Shield was
convicted of assaulting a public officer and received a further
imprisonment of four months to be served cumulatively from 3 February
charges arose out of an incident where Mr Shield became angry when he felt
that a prison guard at Casuarina Prison shut a door
on him. Mr Shield pushed
the guard over and threw a bottle of water at his
12 August 2022, Mr Shield was convicted of a further two counts of assaulting a
public officer, two counts of criminal damage
by fire, one count of criminal
damage and one count of endangering life. He was sentenced to various further
imprisonment.
charges arose out of two incidents.
first incident occurred while Mr Shield was a prisoner at Albany Regional Prison
in early 2020.
of the counts of criminal damage by fire and the count of endangering life
concerned Mr Shield setting alight a pile of mattresses,
bedding and clothing in
of the counts of assaulting a public officer involved assaults on prison guards.
One involved throwing urine in the guard's
face and the other involved grabbing
a guard through a hatch and ripping his
count of criminal damage related to Mr Shield breaking fixtures and fittings in
second incident occurred while Mr Shield was a prisoner at Hakea Prison in mid
2020. The count of criminal damage arising out
of this incident involved Mr
Shield damaging and breaking out of his cell during a riot. The count of
criminal damage by fire involved
Mr Shield setting a blanket on
Whether there is any
pattern of offending behaviour
considering whether or not Mr Shield is a high risk serious offender, the HRSO
Act requires me to have regard to whether or not
there is any pattern of
offending behaviour by the
pattern that emerges from Mr Shield's offending is one of the regular and
persistent use of violence.
circumstances of the offences that were committed by Mr Shield vary. He
has committed offences both alone and in the company
of others. On some
occasions he has used weapons. On others he has not. On some occasions the use
of violence seems to have been
planned and calculated. On others the violence
seems to have been spontaneous and senseless. On some occasions
Mr Shield's offending
involved the use of substances. On other occasions
constant in Mr Shield's lengthy criminal history is the repeated use of
violence. The picture that emerges is that of an offender
who is prone to
resort to violence with little or no
provocation.
Medical, psychiatric or
other assessments relating to Mr Shield
HRSO Act requires me to have regard to any medical, psychiatric, psychological,
or other assessment relating to Mr Shield in
considering whether or not he is a
high risk serious
materials filed by the State contained a number of documents that made
assessments of Mr Shield, including for the purposes of
his sentencing for the
offences he has committed. The State relied on five assessments in
particular.
Psychological report of Ms
Tanina Oliveri dated 20 July
the State referred to a psychological report prepared by Ms Tanina Oliveri
This report was prepared for Mr Shield's last sentencing on 12 August
2022, when he was convicted of the two counts of assaulting
a public officer,
two counts of criminal damage by fire, one count of criminal damage and one
count of endangering life.
Shield told Ms Oliveri that he had begun using methadone about two years prior
in prison. He told her that he intended to continue
to use methadone after his
release before tapering off methadone. He said that he planned to abstain from
substances after
Shield admitted to Ms Oliveri that he had used substances in the past to escape
and distract from negative feelings and problems
and to self-soothe. He told
her that he had not engaged in substance misuse counselling, as he had been
resistant to treatment,
and he had refused offers to participate in treatment.
He added that he had never been offered parole and therefore he saw no benefit
in engaging in treatment. He also stated that he had no intention of applying
for parole as he wanted to be released with no conditions.
She observed that he
was resistant to a substance misuse residential rehabilitation
Oliveri noted evidence of problematic anger, impulsive and aggressive behaviour,
a propensity for violence, emotional dysregulation,
and poor coping and stress
resilience.
She noted that in 2019, Mr Shield had been diagnosed with stimulant use disorder
and cluster b personality traits (antisocial and
borderline personality
structure) with evidence of trauma and attachment
Oliveri assessed Mr Shield using the Douglas, Hart, Webster and Belfrage 2013
) to determine his risk of
future violence towards others. The HCR-20v3 is a 20-item checklist developed
in Canada. It combines
research on violence risk assessment and clinical
practice designed to assess the risk of future violent behaviour and develop
management strategies in criminal and psychiatric
populations.
factors of concern on the historical subscale identified by Ms Oliveri
included past violence, antisocial behaviour, relationship
problems, employment
problems, substance misuse, mental health issues, an antisocial personality
disorder, childhood trauma and poor
treatment responsivity. She also considered
that Mr Shield's history of violence reflected attitudes that supported and
Oliveri considered that relevant clinical items included evidence of problems
with emotional regulation, coping, impulse control,
insight and self-awareness.
She noted, however, that some improvements in his attitude and behaviour were
reported and he denied
recent substance misuse in
relation to risk management, Ms Oliveri observed that Mr Shield intended to
reside with his partner, but he had no firm plans
for employment and he remained
resistant to treatment programs and counselling. She considered that he had
limited prosocial
Oliveri concluded that on the information available to her, Mr Shield was
assessed to be a high risk of future violence, but she
thought his risk may
reduce if he participates in treatment and he is motivated to make positive
Pre-sentence report of Ms
Stephanie Lovelock dated 22 July
the State referred to a pre-sentence report prepared by Ms Lovelock dated
This report was also prepared for Mr Shield's sentencing on 12 August
Lovelock recorded that Mr Shield claimed to have committed the offences for
which he was being sentenced because of his mental
health issues, frustration,
negative peers and long periods of time alone in custody. She considered that
he appeared to have little
empathy for others and thought that he lacked
tolerance and had a propensity to be impulsive and
aggressive.
Lovelock considered that Mr Shield had numerous issues which would need to be
addressed to reduce his risk of re-offending. She
noted that he had refused
previously to participate in programs to address his offending but was now on
methadone, had improved mental
health, a future with his current partner and was
motivated to address his offending
Psychological report of Dr
Kathryn Riordan dated 6 January
the State referred to a psychological report prepared by Dr Riordan on
This report was prepared to assist the Prisoner Review Board in reviewing Mr
Shield for parole.
Riordan interviewed Mr Shield for 2 hours, spoke to his partner, contacted a
Senior Adult Community Corrections Officer and reviewed
various records
identified in her
Riordan noted that Mr Shield completed the Pathways Program between 22 January
2024 and 28 March 2024. She explained that the
Pathways Program is a
50‑session program aimed at assisting participants to understand the
stages of change in relation to
drug and alcohol use and offending behaviour,
acquire skills to desist from drug use and crime, and to develop a relapse and
Riordan noted that Mr Shield was reported to be intermittently engaged in the
program, with his motivation and engagement seemingly
adversely affected by the
titration of his methadone. She said that he was reported to have missed 3
hours and 10 minutes of the
program due to a social visit. However, she also
noted that positively, when engaged with the program contents, he was described
as a highly motivated
participant.
Riordan noted that identified areas of treatment needs were across risk factors
pertaining to his reliance on substance use as
a maladaptive form of coping,
poor problem solving, association with anti-social peers, emotion management,
attitudes that are supportive
of drugs and criminal conduct and
impulsivity.
Riordan said that during the treatment program, Mr Shield was able to
(a) increased insight and awareness that his use of alcohol and other drugs and
involvement in criminal behaviour is maintained by
his poor coping and emotional
regulation skills;
(b) several cognitive and behavioural coping strategies, including the use of
cognitive re-framing, developing coping statements
and recognising unhelpful
thought patterns to increase his coping and problem-solving;
(c) a relapse prevention and risk management plan that centred on both avoidance
and approach-based goals;
(d) an understanding of the importance of avoiding previous hangouts,
anti-social peers, while he developed goals and spent time
with pro-social
family; and
(e) an ability to identify high risk emotional states, such as feelings of grief
Riordan said that Mr Shield articulated the importance of engaging with support
services and expressed his willingness to access
psychological treatment to
further develop his capacity for emotional regulation. She said he was assessed
as having made some initial
treatment gains, with recognition that these gains
required consolidation through additional support if he was released into the
Riordan observed that Mr Shield was unable to complete a violence prevention
program he was enrolled in because it was cancelled
and he could not attend
another course because of his release date. She noted that Mr Shield has
previously refused to engage in
any programmatic intervention. She said that he
has been waitlisted to participate in an alternative violence program and 'Green
Lighthouse'.
Riordan observed that Mr Shield's completion of the Pathways Program was
his first concerted attempt at behavioural change since
he entered the criminal
justice system as a youth. She said that Mr Shield has been able to
sustain motivation to change across
several areas, including substance use,
self-regulation, insight and managing impulsivity. She said that he had begun
the skills he learnt from the Pathways
Riordan considered, however, that Mr Shield's treatment gains are newly
established and yet to be tested in a community setting.
She said that if Mr
Shield lived with his partner, he would be presented with several
She considered that it was reassuring that Mr Shield's partner was aware of
his history of violence and was willing to support
Riordan observed that with respect to his use of violence, Mr Shield has
increased the extent to which he assumes responsibility
not only for his use of
violence, but also for his own behaviour change. While she noted that Mr Shield
presented with outstanding
treatment needs, this is to be expected given his
long history of involvement in the drug use and crime
subculture.
Riordan considered that Mr Shield would benefit from supervised release to
consolidate the treatment gains made in a less restrictive
environment.
She said that Mr Shield was aware that an application for a supervision order
would likely be made, and he expressed his willingness
to comply and perceived
the additional monitoring as helpful to support his community reintegration and
Riordan assessed Mr Shield's risk of violent reoffending using the Violence Risk
Scale, 2nd edition (
explained that the VRS-2 is a fourth-generation violence risk assessment tool
designed to integrate risk, need and treatment
change factors relevant to
violent offenders. She said that it contains both static and dynamic risk
factors and is used to assess
and identify treatment targets linked to violence
and to evaluate an offenders' readiness to
Riordan said that when Mr Shield's life experience and offending history is
considered against the VRS-2, he is assessed as presenting
at 'well above
average risk' for future violent offending, using the 5‑level risk
classification system. She indicated that
within the standardised sample 64.5%
of those who scored within the same risk category as Mr Shield were
reconvicted for a violent
offence within 5 years, and 47.1% were
reconvicted within 3
Riordan observed that inspection of the items that comprise the VRS reveals that
Mr Shield presents with several static (i.e.,
unchangeable) risk factors. She
said that the most prominent static risk was the instability of Mr Shield's
childhood, his early
and persistent involvement in the youth justice system, and
the presence of violence throughout his
Riordan observed that the current risk assessment identified several prominent
dynamic risk factors. She indicated that these
included evidence of an
anti-social personality structure and the rationalisation of the use of
violence. She said that there is
evidence that Mr Shield is attempting to
Riordan observed that Mr Shield has used weapons previously and has difficulty
with emotional control. She noted that Mr Shield
described prior substance
use, including as a coping mechanism. She considered that while Mr Shield has
been able to abstain from
substances in prison, he would need monitoring in the
Riordan considered that Mr Shield's violent and impulsive behaviour was not
limited to when he was using substances. She said
that he has a demonstrated
willingness to use threats, aggression, and violence and there was evidence of a
clear violence cycle.
She noted that Mr Shield had a strong predisposition
towards using violence while in
Riordan considered that it was to Mr Shield's credit that he had made an effort
to change this behaviour recently. She observed
that he also had a limited but
seemingly proactive network of community
Riordan considered that Mr Shield presented with outstanding treatment needs
concerning his violent lifestyle, his criminal personality,
attitudes and peers,
interpersonal aggression, the stability of his relationships, weapons use,
substance use, emotional control,
impulsivity, the violence cycle she had
identified, managing high risk situations, complying with community supervision,
and cognitive
distortions.
Riordan considered that while Mr Shield's abstinence from alcohol and illicit
drug use represented a positive risk mitigation
factor, it was yet to be tested
outside of the confines of the prison environment. She recommended that
urinalysis form part of
any parole order granted to
Riordan thought that Mr Shield should be referred to the Forensic Psychological
Intervention Team (
) for individual
counselling to address his outstanding treatment needs and assist with community
reintegration.
HRSO treatment options
report of Mr Luke Carmichael dated 10 October
the State referred to a HRSO treatment options report prepared by Mr Carmichael
dated 10 October
This report provides an overview of Mr Shield's intervention history to
Carmichael noted that Mr Shield had commenced the 'Think First Program' in
October 2014 but only completed five out of the 35
sessions following a
significant prison
Carmichael also noted that Mr Shield completed the Pathways Program on 28 March
2024. He said that while some treatment gains
were noted, there were areas that
required further
Carmichael said he had referred Mr Shield to FPIT on 5 June 2024 but Mr
Shield was not allocated a clinician prior to his release
Community supervision
assessment of Ms Madi Tait dated 21 October
the State referred to a community supervision assessment prepared by Ms Tait
dated 21 October
report summarises her contact with Mr Shield, his offending history,
programmatic intervention in custody, prison behaviour,
his response to the
Interim Supervision Order, accommodation, employment, community supports and
strategies to manage his offending
behaviours by reference to the expert
Tait said that while Mr Shield was in prison between 1 October 2017 and
11 June 2025, he was involved in 57 documented
was one incident in 2017 during which Mr Shield became argumentative and
abusive towards
were 16 incidents in 2018. This included four assaults on other prisoners and
seven incidents in which Mr Shield threatened
were seven incidents in 2019. This included an assault on another prisoner in
the Disability Services Unit and two incidents
of threatening
were twenty incidents in 2020. This involved six occasions on which Mr Shield
was abusive or made threats against staff or
other prisoners and various
occasions on which he damaged his
were five incidents in 2021. Two of these involved making threats to
were two incidents in 2022. This involved an incident in which he threw boiling
water in another prisoner's
were two incidents in 2023. Both involved aggressive behaviour towards
were four incidents in 2024. None of these involved aggressive behaviour
towards staff or assaults. Compared to Mr Shield's
previous conduct, they
were relatively
Tait indicated that she had supervised Mr Shield since he began his
intensive supervision order on the 11 June 2025. She said
that Mr Shield
was initially reluctant to engage but that they had built rapport and he was now
open to engage in meaningful
discussion.
Tait observed that Mr Shield was accepting of his conditions and from the outset
approached the order as an opportunity to seek
assistance in addressing his
criminogenic needs and to keep himself
accountable.
Tait observed that with her encouragement, Mr Shield had begun exploring
opportunities to engage in activities beyond the strict
parameters of his
Interim Supervision Order. She said this included attending licensed venues
with his partner and her
Tait reported that Mr Shield attends punctually and does not present any
management issues and had not had any incidents of non‑compliance
the Interim Supervision
Tait said that Mr Shield remained at his approved residence with his partner and
her family and that the environment appeared
stable, supportive and conducive to
Mr Shield's rehabilitation and compliance with the conditions of the
Tait said that Mr Shield had recently completed a 10‑week Surface
Extraction training
Tait noted that Mr Shield has undergone urinalysis testing on nine separate
with all results returning
negative for illicit
substances.
Tait said that in light of Mr Shield's ongoing compliance with and understanding
of the present conditions, she did not recommend
simplifying
Reports prepared under s 74
of the HRSO Act
considering whether or not Mr Shield is a high risk serious offender, I am also
required to have regard to any report prepared
under the HRSO
Dr Wynn Owen's report dated
Wynn Owen interviewed Mr Shield on 24 September 2025. He was also provided with
various materials identified in his
Wynn Owen diagnosed Mr Shield as suffering from an antisocial personality
disorder. He noted that Mr Shield's behaviour demonstrated
a consistent
disregard for, and violation of, the rights of
Wynn Owen also diagnosed Mr Shield as suffering from a substance use disorder
(amphetamine and opiates) that was currently in
Wynn Owen assessed Mr Shield using a Structured Professional Judgment approach
to risk assessment, which takes account of static
and historical risk factors
using a combination of actuarial tools, structured assessment guides and a
clinical psychiatric
assessment.
Wynn Owen assessed Mr Shield using the Violence Risk Appraisal Guide, Revised,
). This is an actuarial
risk tool designed to assess the likelihood of violent or sexual reoffending
among male offenders, it is
a twelve-item
instrument.
Wynn Owen considered that Mr Shield's score of 30 on the VRAG‑R was in the
highest risk category. He said that offenders
with the same score as Mr Shield
on release had a 58% likelihood of committing a new violent offence within 5
years of release and
an 78% likelihood of committing a new violent offence
Wynn Owen observed, however, that this estimate was a group estimate, not
specific to Mr Shield, and should be considered in association
with any dynamic
risk and/or protective factors present. He also noted that the statistic refers
to the likelihood of committing
any new violent offence, not specifically a new
serious offence as defined in the HRSO
Wynn Owen also assessed Mr Shield using the Hare Psychopathy Checklist-Revised,
second edition, 2003 (
Dr Wynn Owen explained that the PCL‑R is a 20-item scale for the
assessment of psychopathy that requires a trained clinician
semi-structured interview, file review and other available collateral
information to measure inferred personality traits
behaviours.
Wynn Owen explained that a score of 30 or more indicates prototypical
psychopathy. He defined psychopathy as a personality disorder
characterised by
affective deficits with callous unemotional traits, and impulsive antisocial
behaviours that lead to frequent criminal
behaviour. He said that the presence
of prototypical psychopathy is associated with a significantly increased risk of
future violence
in individuals who have previously committed violent
Wynn Owen considered that although Mr Shield's PCL-R score did not meet the
threshold for psychopathy, it still indicated a high
level of psychopathy. Dr
Wynn Owen said that Mr Shield's Factor 2 (social deviance) score is very
high being more than 1 standard
deviation above the mean, however, his score on
Factor 1 (affective/interpersonal) is well below the mean for male
offenders. Dr
Wynn Owen observed that the high social deviance score is
consistent with an individual who lives a criminal
Wynn Owen also assessed Mr Shield using the Historical, Clinical and Risk
Management 20, version 3, Douglas, Hart, Webster, Belfrage
). He explained that the
HCR-20 is a tool to assess the risk of violence which considers the presence of
a range of historical/static
and dynamic risk factors for future
Wynn Owen considered that nine historical risk factors were present.
Dr Wynn Owen considered the risk factor history of serious problems with
violence was present. He considered that Mr Shield's
history demonstrates
a clear pattern of violence that started in childhood, continued through
adolescence and into adulthood. He
noted that violence had occurred with high
frequency in a number of different settings and had involved others and
Wynn Owen expressed the opinion that a pattern of early onset violent behaviour
sustained through adolescence into adulthood is
strongly associated with an
elevated risk of future
Dr Wynn Owen considered the risk factor history of serious problems with other
antisocial behaviour was also present.
He observed that Mr Shield has a history
of antisocial behaviours including substance abuse and criminal activity. He
as with Mr Shield's pattern of violent behaviour, the pattern
started in childhood, continued through adolescence and then into adulthood
this is associated with an elevated risk of continued antisocial behaviour and
an increased likelihood of future
Dr Wynn Owen considered the risk factor history of problems with relationships
was present. He observed that Mr Shield
has had some problems with
intimate relationships in the past. He noted that Mr Shield was presently in a
relationship which is
usually a protective factor but Dr Wynn Owen thought it
was too early in the relationship to comment on whether it would be protective
Wynn Owen observed that Mr Shield has a history of negative peer associations
and drug use and he noted the risk that relationship
stress might trigger a
return of old
behaviours.
Dr Wynn Owen considered that the risk factor history of serious problems with
employment was present. He observed that
Mr Shield's history of paid
employment is short and that unemployment is associated with an increased
likelihood of a return to criminal
Dr Wynn Owen considered that the risk factor history of substance use was
present. He observed that Mr Shield has used
substances to manage negative
thoughts and feelings for his entire life and has therefore not developed
alternative emotional management
and coping strategies. He noted that
intoxication has played a role in Mr Shield's prior
Dr Wynn Owen considered that the risk factor history of serious problems with
personality disorder is
Dr Wynn Owen considered that the risk factor history of serious problems with
traumatic experiences is present. He explained
that the early exposure to and
normalisation of violence, neglect and traumatic events are experiences found
more frequently in individuals
who themselves engage in general criminality and
Dr Wynn Owen considered that the risk factor history of serious problems with
violent attitudes was present. He observed
that the risk factor reflects a
history of firmly held violent attitudes, beliefs, values and
Dr Wynn Owen considered that the risk factor history of serious problems with
treatment or supervision response is present.
He noted that Mr Shield had
declined to participate in any treatment programs before he participated in the
2024 Pathways Program.
He said that some gains were reported to have been made
in the Pathways Program however there are a number of outstanding treatment
needs. He observed that problems with treatment affect an individual's future
risk as treatment needs are unaddressed, perpetuating
Wynn Owen then turned to consider whether any clinical risk factors were
present. He did not consider that the following clinical
risk factors were
(a) problems with violent ideation or
(b) problems with professional services and plans (and he noted that Mr Shield
had complied with the Interim Supervision Order
Wynn Owen also considered that three clinical risk factors were possibly
first of these was the risk factor future problems with living situation. Dr
Wynn Owen observed that Mr Shield is reliant on
his partner and her parents for
accommodation. He said that Mr Shield's history of adverse family home
environments and dysfunctional
relationships, means he will need to work to
acclimatise. Dr Wynn Owen also noted that the accommodation will only
remain viable
while the relationship
second of these was the risk factor future problems with living situation. Dr
Wynn Owen noted that Mr Shield has support from
his partner, her parents and his
sister and plans to maintain a very small social network to reduce risk in
relation to antisocial
peers. Dr Wynn Owen observed that while the
rationale for the decision is understandable, this places considerable reliance
small group of
third of these was the risk factor future problems with treatment or supervision
response. Dr Wynn Owen considered that although
Mr Shield has no prior
history of supervised release, his behaviour under prison supervision has been
consistently problematic until
2023. Dr Wynn Owen said that at that time Mr
Shield reported developing insight and an appreciation that his past behaviours
inappropriate and self-defeating. Dr Wynn Owen said that there had been a
sustained change in Mr Shield's behaviour in prison until
his supervised release
and Mr Shield had complied with supervision and monitoring
Wynn Owen considered that Mr Shield's violence risk is related to an antisocial
personality structure with antisocial, anti-authoritarian
and violence condoning
attitudes in the context of a significant past history of serious violence. He
considered that this resulted
in a lack of consequential thinking and no
consideration or empathy for the effect of his actions on others. He opined
that substance
use has been a significant, although not essential, contributor
through increasing impulsivity and further reducing Mr Shield's limited
for emotional
regulation.
Wynn Owen thought that identifying the most likely risk scenarios was
challenging given the broad range of Mr Shield's prior offending
but considered
that there was a risk that Mr Shield would react violently to sudden
stressful situations in the community, particularly
if drugs or alcohol were
Wynn Owen thought that whether Mr Shield would imminently re‑offend could
not be predicted with any accuracy. He noted
the efforts that Mr Shield had
made to change since March 2023 but also his history of violence and the new
stressors he would face
Wynn Owen considered that there is a high likelihood of future violent
behaviours. Dr Wynn Owen observed that Mr Shield has a
number of static
risk factors associated with a high risk of future violence, in particular
adverse childhood experiences and early
onset of violent behaviour with
continuation across developmental stages. He considered that the important
dynamic factors are antisocial
personality disorder with associated attitudes
and behaviours, in particular the use of violence, threatened and actual, to
his ends, and substance abuse. He opined that if these dynamic factors
are unmodified there is a high risk of future
Wynn Owen considered that supervision and monitoring while Mr Shield
consolidates current treatment gains and addresses outstanding
treatment needs
will significantly mitigate risk. In his view, supervision should monitor Mr
Shield's ability to manage stressors
including relationships stresses and
provide support to remain abstinent from substances, through regular random
Wynn Owen expressed the opinion that Mr Shield presents a high risk of
committing a serious violent offence in the future if not
subject to a
restriction order. This opinion was based on both his clinical assessment and
consideration of the outputs of violence
risk assessment tools he
Wynn Owen explained that his opinion was influenced by Mr Shield's
significant history of violent offending across all developmental
stages, and
his Antisocial Personality
Wynn Owen observed that Mr Shield has engaged in limited treatment to date
having declined to participate in treatment prior to
agreeing to the Pathways
Wynn Owen considered that Mr Shield has outstanding treatment needs in relation
to violent offending including violent attitudes
and behaviours, emotional
recognition and regulation, impulsivity and problems with consequential
thinking, stress management and
Wynn Owen recommended that in addition to the requirement for clinical support
to consolidate the reported gains made in the 2024
(a) Mr Shield should engage with a FPIT psychologist to address these
requirements and to assist with ongoing community reintegration
and management
of supervision and monitoring relationships; and
(b) consideration should be given to facilitating access to clinical
intervention to address childhood trauma through a private psychologist
Wynn Owen considered that the terms of any supervision order reflect his high
risk situations for future serious offending, in
particular alcohol and drug use
and association with antisocial and or criminal peers. He considered that any
supervision order
should be for a duration of 3 - 4 years and that if
no risks arise, the levels of supervision and monitoring should be reduced to
facilitate Mr Shield taking responsibility for managing
Dr Ben Bannister's report
dated 30 September
Bannister interviewed Mr Shield on 12 September 2025 for 3 hours,
reviewed various materials provided to him and spoke to various
individuals
involved with Mr
Bannister's conclusion was that Mr Shield currently poses a high risk/above
average risk of committing a further serious offence
if not subject to either a
restriction order for continuing detention or a community supervision order
under the HRSO
Bannister considered that Mr Shield has experienced a range of challenging and
traumatic events from a very young age, and this
has likely predisposed him to
anti-sociality through a number of pathways including anti-social modelling and
reinforcement of behaviours
that were contrary to social
Dr Bannister
observed that Mr Shield felt neglected, rejected, abandoned and abused and has
harboured anger and resentment from childhood.
Dr Bannister thought that Mr
Shield had used substances to manage negative emotions and this had inhibited
his ability to develop
adaptive coping
Bannister thought that Mr Shield has externalised his emotional distress through
hostility and become desensitised to aggressive
interpersonal interactions. He
considered that these behaviours were reinforced over time, resulting in an
aversion to perceived
weakness and selfishness. He noted, however, that Mr
Shield has worked hard to counteract this worldview
Dr Wynn Owen, Dr Bannister assessed Mr Shield for psychopathy using the
Bannister said that Mr Shield scored in the low range on the measure. He said
that compared to the normative sample, Mr Shield
scored higher than 21.2%
of North American male offenders on the tool. He said that Mr Shield scored
lower on Factor 1 (affective/interpersonal)
compared to Factor 2
(social deviance), scoring higher than 16.8% and 43.3% of the normative sample,
respectively.
Bannister considered that this broadly means that the factors that pertain to Mr
Shield's score are related comparatively more
to his anti‑social
behaviours and lifestyle rather than his inherent personality
Dr Riordan, Dr Bannister also assessed Mr Shield's risk of re‑offending
Bannister found that Mr Shield's total score for static variables is 13 out of a
relation to the static variable 'current age', Dr Bannister noted that Mr
Shield's current age is 31 years old. Dr Bannister
observed that age has been
shown to be a strong and consistent predictor of violent and general recidivism
and most research suggested
that younger age is associated with increased risk
relation to the static variable 'age at first violent conviction',
Dr Bannister noted that Mr Shield was convicted of one count
of unlawful
assault occasioning bodily harm in circumstances of aggravation when he was 16.
Dr Bannister observed that offenders
who begin their criminal careers at an
early age are more likely to
relation to the static variable 'number of convictions pre-adulthood', Dr
Bannister observed that Mr Shield had 20 convictions
as a juvenile. He
considered that criminal history is one of the strongest predictors of violent
recidivism and early behaviour
problems are among the strongest predictors of
anti-social behaviours later in
relation to the static variable 'violence throughout lifespan',
Dr Bannister observed that Mr Shield has demonstrated a pattern
of violence
beginning in childhood which has continued relatively unabated until recently,
and a history of violent behaviour has
been demonstrated to be predictive of
future violent
relation to the static variable 'prior breaches of legally mandated conditions',
Dr Bannister noted that Mr Shield has no prior
breaches of legally mandated
conditions as an
relation to the static variable 'stability of family upbringing',
Dr Bannister observed that there was little apparent stability
Mr Shield's upbringing. He considered that an unstable, chaotic family
upbringing has also been linked with future
Bannister found that Mr Shield's total score for dynamic variables is 37 out of
relation to the dynamic variable 'violent lifestyle', Dr Bannister observed
that until shortly before Mr Shield's release, aggressive
behaviours were a way
of life for him, including being part of organised crime groups. He noted that
Mr Shield appeared to require
very little provocation to act violently. Dr
Bannister considered that a lifestyle or a consistent pattern of violent
is most likely linked to the increased likelihood, frequency and
severity of future
relation to the dynamic variable 'criminal personality', Dr Bannister
explained that this item refers primarily to the affective
personality traits of
psychopathy, including superficiality, glibness, grandiosity, lack of remorse,
and shallow affect. He said
that Mr Shield's presentation (likely highly
defended) showed a degree of shallow affect, demonstrated by his expressions of
and remorse being somewhat
relation to the dynamic variable 'criminal attitudes', Dr Bannister noted
that Mr Shield acknowledged long-standing criminal attitudes,
although he now
said he eschewed those attitudes. Dr Bannister observed that pro-criminal
attitudes and values have also been demonstrated
in the research to be
predictive of future violent behaviour and general
criminality.
relation to the dynamic variable 'work ethic', Dr Bannister noted that
Mr Shield has historically only had short term jobs but
said that he wanted
to get a job and might be able to obtain a job with his brother-in-law. Dr
Bannister said that offenders who
do not work or use violence as a means of
financially supporting themselves are at an increased risk of future
relation to the dynamic variable 'criminal peers', Dr Bannister observed
that Mr Shield's peer group has consisted predominantly
of antisocial peers
since a young age. He said that Mr Shield currently has two friends from prison
who he continues to have some
criminal peers model violent or criminal behaviour, reinforce such behaviour and
the acquisition of antisocial values and
relation to the dynamic variable 'interpersonal aggression', Dr Bannister
noted that Mr Shield has habitually used aggressive
behaviours. Dr Bannister
said that offenders who are habitually aggressive are more likely to violently
relation to the dynamic variable 'emotional control', Dr Bannister
considered that there was a strong link between Mr Shield's
offending and his problems with emotional control. Dr Bannister said that
violent offenders have poorer control over their
anger and that a mismanagement
of negative affect can elevate their violence risk
relation to the dynamic variable 'violence during institutionalisation',
Dr Bannister observed that while Mr Shield was imprisoned,
a history of consistent involvement in incidents of non-compliance, threats,
intimidation, violence and fire-setting.
Dr Bannister said that offenders
who display violent institutional behaviour may also be at an increased risk for
future violence
or criminality after being released from
relation to the dynamic variable 'weapon use', Dr Bannister observed that
Mr Shield has a number of convictions for offenses that
include using a weapon
or possession of a weapon. Dr Bannister said that the use of weapons to
perpetrate physical or psychological
injury is associated with an increased risk
of future violent
relation to the dynamic variable 'insight into violence', Dr Bannister
observed that Mr Shield was able to articulate the relevant
dynamics that
contributed to his offending and to recognise that he previously did not take
responsibility for his actions. Dr Bannister
said that offenders who
refuse to accept responsibility for their actions, are at an increased risk of
relation to the dynamic variable 'mental disorder', Dr Bannister noted that
Mr Shield did not appear to have a mental disorder
(excluding any anti-social
Personality Disorder or Substance Use Disorder, in remission or otherwise) that
appears linked to his
use of violence. Dr Bannister said that if a
relationship exists between and offender's mental disorder and the onset of
activity (which he explained was a controversial proposition), then the
recurrence of mental illness can render the individual a
greater risk for
relation to the dynamic variable 'substance-related problems', Dr Bannister
noted that Mr Shield acknowledged using substances
from the age of about 11 or
12, and subsequent polysubstance use and there was a strong link between his
drug use and violent offending.
Dr Bannister said that the abuse of
various psychoactive substances has also been linked to a heightened risk of
violent and general
recidivism.
relation to the dynamic variable 'substance-related problems', Dr Bannister
said Mr Shield has previously struggled to maintain
a stable relationship and
that his prior significant relationship was unpredictable and ended with him
making threats to kill his
partner while he was in prison. Dr Bannister noted
that Mr Shield's current relationship was positive, but it has not yet been
long-term. He said that a lack of stable relationships has also been
associated with an increased risk of future violence and
criminality.
relation to the dynamic variable 'community support', Dr Bannister said
that positive community support appeared to be in place
for Mr Shield. Dr
Bannister noted that inadequate community support can undermine an offender's
successful re-integration into society
and elevate their likelihood of
re-offending.
relation to the dynamic variable 'released to high-risk situations',
Dr Bannister said that Mr Shield was able to articulate a
relapse prevention plan, focussed on avoiding anti-social peers, addressing
emotion management, taking responsibility
for his behaviours, maintaining a
positive lifestyle, and keeping meaningfully occupied. Dr Bannister observed
that the relapse
prevention approach to the management of high-risk behaviours
is predicated on the avoidance or appropriate management of high-risk
situations.
relation to the dynamic variable 'violence cycle', Dr Bannister observed
that Mr Shield has demonstrated a reliance on instrumental
threats, aggression,
and violence to have his needs met in interpersonal relationships and
interactions with others, with evidence
of a clear violence cycle to this end.
Dr Bannister said that research shows that a violent history predicts future
violence, and
that offenders who committed specific acts of violence in the past
are more likely to commit similar violent acts in the
relation to the dynamic variable 'impulsivity', Dr Bannister observed that Mr
Shield acknowledged that he has often acted impulsively,
and this has frequently
been reflected in his offending. Dr Bannister said that offenders who tend
to engage in impulsive verbal
and physical behaviours and fail to consider the
long-term consequences of their behaviour present a higher risk for future
relation to the dynamic variable 'cognitive distortion', Dr Bannister
observed that Mr Shield has employed cognitive distortions
in order to
rationalise or justify his offending and appeared to hold rigid beliefs that
support the use of violence or anti-social
behaviours and minimised the harm he
has cause to others. Dr Bannister said that offenders who demonstrate
'black and white', stereotyping,
over‑generalising, and other problematic
thinking patterns, also often tend to perceive events
inaccurately.
relation to the dynamic variable 'compliance with community supervision', Dr
Bannister observed that Mr Shield has kept his appointments,
made meaningful
Interim Supervision Order. Dr Bannister
said that consistent
non-compliance with community supervision, or the offender's refusal to
recognise its importance, has been linked
to violent and general
recidivism.
relation to the dynamic variable 'security level of releasing institution', Dr
Bannister noted that Mr Shield is currently in
the community. Dr Bannister said
that offenders released directly from higher level security institutions into
the community likely
present a greater risk for repeat violent offending, than
offenders who were discharged from lower security
facilities.
Bannister considered that Mr Shield's pro-rated total combined static and
dynamic risk variable score for these variables is currently
assessed as 50 out
of a possible 78. Dr Bannister explained this places Mr Shield in the
61.4th percentile. He said that this is
in the high-risk category of violent
reoffending as defined by the VRS-2, and in the Level IV (above average
risk level) of the common
language risk
categories.
Bannister said that the VRS-2 normative sample, suggests if Mr Shield is
not subject to an Order, he will have a 17.1% to 30.8%
chance of violently
reoffending within three years and 29.8% to 45.2% chance of violently
reoffending within five
Bannister considered that Mr Shield had treatment needs in areas such as
anti-social peers, emotional control, improving insight
into his offending
cycle, and substance use. He thought that some of Mr Shield's treatment is
likely to be in the context of consolidating
and building on previously made
Bannister thought that Mr Shield was in a 'preparatory stage of change' in that
he has recognised his problem areas, has articulated
a desire to want to change
them, and there is evidence of relevant behavioural change. Dr Bannister said
that it is only the relatively
recent nature of such changes, and reduced
opportunity for being tested under high-risk situations, that prevents Mr Shield
being assessed as being in the Action or Maintenance stages of
Bannister considered that the most likely risk scenario for Mr Shield is
that he relapses into drug use, and/or through acting
out aggressively due to
poor emotional control in response to a perceived threat or provocation against
himself or someone he cares
most serious risk scenario this could result in serious injury to another
Bannister explained that it is not possible to predict the likelihood of
Mr Shield committing a serious offence, specifically
as defined by the HRSO
Act, with absolute accuracy for three
first reason that Dr Bannister gave was that the risk assessment tools used
compare an offender's score on the tool to the normative
sample used by the
developers of that tool in order to validate it. He said that if the normative
sample of a tool does not provide
information on recidivism for specific
offences, such as those outlined as 'serious' by the HRSO Act, then the capacity
tool to accurately predict risk of specifically committing such crimes
accurately is compromised. He express the opinion, however,
tools like the
VRS‑2 allow for estimates to be given relating to general and violent
recidivism, because those outcomes were
assessed in the validation of the
second reason that Dr Bannister gave is that as the concept of risk of
recidivism is dynamic, contextual and individualistic,
it can change depending
on situational or psychological influences. He explained that this means that
the concept of risk prediction
using structured professional judgment lends
itself more readily to broad appraisals of likelihood, rather than specific
determinations
of particular
third reason that Dr Bannister gave was that all generally accepted empirically
validated structured risk assessment tools have
a moderate degree of predicative
validity which means that even when they are used as intended by the developers,
they are still
not able to predict with absolute accuracy. He observed,
however, that a moderate degree of predictive validity is statistically
His view that the risk scenarios are able to be presented as being accurate
enough for legitimate consideration are because
they typically rely on the
empirically validated concept of past behaviour being a very good predictor of
Bannister considered that if a community supervision order was made, it should
incorporate at least those conditions currently
imposed by the Interim
Supervision Order. He said that consideration should also be given to reducing
the conditions after Mr Shield
has demonstrated consistent
self-management.
Bannister recommended that Mr Shield be referred for individual psychotherapy
with a suitably qualified psychologist to address
outstanding treatment needs
and consolidate any previously made
Bannister considered that any order should last at least three years to provide
Mr Shield with an opportunity to consolidate and
internalise the skills required
to successfully self-manage his
Attempts and effects of any
rehabilitation program
HRSO Act requires me to have regard to:
(a) any efforts by the offender to address the cause or causes of the offender's
offending behaviour, including whether the offender
has participated in any
rehabilitation
(b) whether or not the offender's participation in any rehabilitation programme
has had a positive effect on the
relatively recently, Mr Shield has not meaningfully participated in any
rehabilitation programs. The material before me records
that he has generally
refused to participate in such programs while in prison. He was however enrolled
in the 'Think First Program'
in 2014, although he only completed a small number
of sessions. In 2015, he was scheduled to take part in a medium intensity
program but was unable to participate.
Shield completed the Pathways Program in 2024. Although it appears that Mr
Shield missed some of the relevant sessions, he positively
engaged with the
program contents and was described as a highly motivated participant.
Riordan observed that the Pathways Program represents Mr Shield's first
concerted attempt at behavioural change since he entered
the criminal justice
system as a youth.
While Dr Riordan
acknowledged the efforts that Mr Shield had made and his treatment gains, she
considered that he continued to have
outstanding treatment
Dr Riordan saw Mr Shield in January 2025, he had been waitlisted to participate
in an alternative violence program and Green
Lighthouse.
There was evidence before Lemonis J at the preliminary hearing that Mr Shield
has completed the Green Lighthouse program and has
counselling.
Dr Wynn Owen and Dr Bannister saw Mr Shield in September 2025. They
thought that Mr Shield had outstanding treatment needs
and should be referred to
the psychologist.
Other relevant matters
am required to consider any other relevant
State referred to the fact that a post sentence supervision order imposed by the
Prisoner Review Board on 11 June
was cancelled at the time the Interim Supervision Order was imposed by operation
Administration Act 2003
Propensity to commit
serious offences in the future, the risk of committing such offences and the
need to protect the community
considering whether or not Mr Shield is a high risk serious offender, I am
required to have regard to:
(a) whether or not the offender has a propensity to commit serious offences in
(b) the risk that, if the offender were not subject to a restriction order, he
would commit a serious
(c) the need to protect members of the community from that
Shield has a long history of persistent violent offending, that began in
childhood and continued into adulthood, including during
his imprisonment. His
offending includes 13 serious offences between 2011 and 2022, as well as other
violent offending.
of Dr Riordan, Dr Wynn Owen and Dr Bannister considered that the risk of Mr
Shield violently reoffending was significant. Dr
Riordan thought that Mr
Shield's risk of violent re-offending was 'well above
Dr Wynn Owen thought that Mr Shield was a 'high risk' of violent reoffending if
not subject to a restriction
Dr Bannister's conclusion was that Mr Shield currently poses a 'high
risk/above average risk' of committing a further serious offence
if not subject
to a restriction
am satisfied on the evidence before me that there is a significant risk that Mr
Shield will revert to his pattern of violent offending.
As I have explained
above, Dr Riordan, Dr Wynn Owen and Dr Bannister have explained the basis
of their assessments and I find their
evidence to be cogent and compelling.
my view, given Mr Shield's long history of violent offending, including
committing serious offences, there is a risk that he will
commit a serious
offence if he is not subject to a restriction order and there is a need to
protect members of the community from
Whether Mr Shield is a high
risk serious offender
Is there an
unacceptable risk
that Mr Shield will
commit a serious offence?
concept of 'unacceptable' risk connotes a balancing exercise that requires the
court to have regard to, amongst other things,
the nature of the risk and extent
of the harm, the likelihood of the risk coming to fruition and the serious
consequences for the
offender if an order is
regard to the nature of the risk, as I have said, I am satisfied on the evidence
before me that there is a significant risk
that Mr Shield will revert to
his pattern of violent offending.
Shield's historic propensity for violence and willingness to use weapons means
that any victim of any future offending could be
seriously physically injured.
Any victim of any future violent offending might also be likely to be
traumatised.
considering the likelihood that Mr Shield will engage in future violent
offending it is relevant to recall that while he was in
prison his involvement
in rehabilitation programs has been limited. Until recently, Mr Shield has not
meaningfully participated
in any such programs.
is not to detract from the fact that more recently Mr Shield has engaged
with such programs and taken steps towards rehabilitation
that might reduce the
risk of his reoffending. However, as I have already discussed in detail, each
of Dr Riordan, Dr Wynn Owen
and Dr Bannister thought that Mr Shield
continues to have significant outstanding treatment needs. They all considered
risk of Mr Shield violently reoffending was significant. As I
have indicated, I find their evidence to be cogent and compelling.
am satisfied that the material before me establishes to a high degree of
probability that if Mr Shield were to be released without
any restriction, there
would be an unacceptable risk that he will commit a serious
to make a restriction order
to ensure adequate protection of the community?
am also satisfied to a high degree of probability that it is necessary to make a
restriction order to ensure the adequate protection
of the community.
Mr Shield were simply to be released, the community would be exposed to the
unacceptable risk that I have identified.
considering whether it is necessary
make a restriction order, it is necessary to consider whether there are
measures, other than a restriction order, that would provide
adequate protection
of the community against the unacceptable risk. If there are, the risk could no
longer sensibly be regarded
'unacceptable'.
for Mr Shield did not submit that there were any other measures that would
provide adequate protection for the community.
It was not apparent to me that
there were any.
Mr Shield is a high risk
serious offender
all of these matters, I am satisfied that Mr Shield is a high risk serious
Whether a continuing
detention order or supervision order should be made
effect of s 48(1) of the HRSO Act is that upon finding Mr Shield to be
a high risk serious offender, I must either make a continuing
detention order or
a supervision order.
court should choose the order that is least invasive or destructive of Mr
Shield's right to be at liberty while, at the same
time, ensuring an adequate
degree of protection for the
I have mentioned, the State's position was that the court might be satisfied
that a supervision order in similar terms to the
Interim Supervision Order would
ensure adequate protection of the
Mr Shield also submitted that such an order would be appropriate.
48(1)(b) of the HRSO Act provides that the power to make a supervision order is
subject to the operation of s 29 of the HRSO
Act, which provides that a
court cannot make a supervision order unless it is satisfied, on the balance of
probabilities, that the
offender will substantially comply with the standard
conditions of the order as made. The onus of so satisfying the court is on the
Shield has also fully complied with the conditions of the Interim Supervision
Order. Further, the evidence suggests that he is
motivated to use his release
on supervision as an opportunity to continue his progress to towards
rehabilitation. I am satisfied
that it is more likely than not that Mr Shield
will substantially comply with the standard conditions of the order as made.
have reviewed the draft conditions proposed by the State and consider that those
are appropriate to address the issues raised on
the evidence concerning Mr
Shield, his risk of offending, his treatment needs and his supervision and
monitoring needs.
the hearing before me, Dr Wynn Owen and Dr Bannister were asked to review the
terms of the draft supervision order proposed by
the State insofar as it related
to alcohol. They both considered those terms to be
appropriate.
Ms Tait gave evidence that the terms of the draft order had been drafted based
on the view of the
consider the appropriate length of time for that supervision order is three
years. This is the period of time that Dr Bannister
considered to be
appropriate. Dr Wynn Owen agreed that three to four years was appropriate.
those reasons I make the following
found the respondent is a high risk serious offender within the meaning of
High Risk Serious
Offenders Act 2020
(WA), the respondent be the subject of a supervision
order for a period of three years commencing on 28 November 2025 on the
further order, there is to be a suppression order regarding any publication of
the address, including the town, at which the
respondent will reside when the
subject of the supervision order. This order does not apply to communications
by any representative
of a party to these proceedings for the purpose of
conducting the case or providing advice in respect of the case or by any person
who is responsible for supervising the respondent if the communication is
necessary for that purpose or to judicial officers or court
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF
WESTERN AUSTRALIA
IN THE MATTER of the
High Risk Serious
Offenders Act 2020
_________________________________________________________________________
SUPERVISION
ORDER MADE BY THE HONOURABLE JUSTICE PALMER
ON 7 NOVEMBER 2025
‑_________________________________________________________________________
Pursuant to
section 48(1)(b)
High Risk Serious Offenders Act
(WA), the Court, having found that the Respondent is a high risk
serious offender within the meaning of
section 7(1)
High Risk Serious Offenders Act 2020
(WA), makes a supervision order in relation to the Respondent, for a period of 3
years from 28 November 2025, on the following conditions:
You, BENJAMIN
JACK SHIELD, must:
CONDITIONS REQUIRED BY THE HRSO ACT
to a Community Corrections Officer (CCO) at the East Perth Adult Community
Corrections Centre, 30 Moore Street, East Perth
within 48 hours of being issued
this Order and advise the officer of your current name and
to and receive visits from, a CCO as directed by the
a CCO of any change to your name, home, or place of employment at least 2
business days before the change
under the supervision of a CCO, which includes, comply with any reasonable
direction of the officer (including direction for the
purposes of section 31 or
the State of Western Australia
without the permission of a CCO
commit a serious offence during the period of the
subject to electronic monitoring under section
at [REDACTED]
spend each night there (period can be defined by a CCO). You can stay at a
different address only if the different address is
approved in advance by a CCO
assigned to
to a CCO and supervision by a CCO
and receive visits from, a CCO at
times and at places as directed by the CCO, such an arrangement having regard to
any employment
commitments you
start, change or increase any paid or unpaid
education, training or
volunteer work without the prior approval of the
at programs or treatment
and engage in all appointments as directed. Receive visits from any medical
practitioner
psychiatrist
psychologist,
counsellor, support service, mentor and/or support person as directed by a
to WA Police
to the Officer
in-Charge (OIC) of the
Serious Offender Enforcement Squad (SOES) at the Hatch Building, 144 Stirling
PERTH WA 6000, or their delegate
at a nominated Police station within 48 hours of your Order starting and report
to and rece
ve visits from Police when and
were directed by the OIC of SOES or their
asked to, allow Police Officers to enter and search your home and/or vehicle and
(take) any items they believe
to contravene the conditions of the Order. The Police officer is to tell you
they are using this power
before acting pursuant to
at your home and/or vehicle when Police Officers are searching your home and/or
vehicle under Condition
Disclosure/
of Information
to the exchange of any information about you between people and agencies
involved in carrying out the Order, including any medical
practitioner
psychologist, psychiatrist
counsellor;
the CCO, WA Police, or other person or agencies approved by the CCO, to
interview any associates or potential associates
where appropriate to disclose to them
confidential information including your offending
Restrictions
on contact with Victims
you have the prior approval of your CCO, you must have no contact with the
victims of any of your serious offending
the most recent was when you were sentenced on 12 August 2022
18 and 19 means speaking to the victim in person or by phone, making any
gestures towards the victim, messaging the victim using
electronic devices, or
asking someone else to speak to or send a message to the victim;
if you see any of the victims, you must immediately
leave where you are, without
speaking to them or gesturing to them, and you must look away from the victim at
to the CCO and WA Police any contact with the victims within 48 hours of any
speaking to the victim in
person or by phone, making any gestures towards the victim, messaging the victim
using electronic devices,
or asking someone else to speak to or send a message
commit any other criminal offence where the maximum penalty for which includes
imprisonment, and which involves either sexual
offences, violence, threats of
violence, or the possession of weapons or offensive
instruments;
possess any offensive or prohibited weapon, or
be armed with any kind of weapon that may cause fear in public places without a
reason/excuse;
possess or use any prohibited drugs, plants or other substances to which the
Misuse of Drugs Act 1981
applies, this
includes cannabis. This does not apply to a drug that your doctor has prescribed
for you, as long as you don't use more
than the doctor has told you to
with a curfew, requiring you to remain at and not leave your approved address as
directed by a CCO from time to
subject to a curfew under this order, during the time when you must be at your
to the front yard if a CCO or Police Officer asks to see you;
on the telephone to any CCO or Police Officer or their representative monitoring
your curfew, if they call to check you are
subject to a curfew under this order, you must tell all adults at the house who
may answer the telephone or door that you are
on a curfew and ask them to tell
you about attempts by police or a CCO to contact
of high-risk situations
to possess, use or purchase any alcohol without prior approval of a
for, and submit to, urinalysis or other testing for alcohol or prohibited drugs
as directed by the CCO or by a Police Officer
including accompanying such
persons to an appropriate location for a sample to be
a legitimate sample pursuant to condition
to be with anyone who you known or ought to know, to be affected by prohibited
drugs, unless the identity of such person is approved
in advance by a CCO;
to be anywhere that prohibited drugs are being used
if drugs are being used at your home,
go to another part of the house, or ask the persons using prohibited drugs to
to go into any licensed premises, other than licenced cafes, restaurants and
sporting clubs unless permitted or required to do
so for the following
the purpose of avoiding or minimising a serious risk of death or injury to
yourself or another person
a purpose, and duration approved in advance by a CCO;
the order of a CCO or Police
no contact with any person whom you know to be a nominee, associate or member of
any Outlaw Motorcycle Gangs, unless approved
in advance by your
reasonably requested by your CCO, give them details of your activities,
movements and the people with whom you have contact in
the community;
must not assault, threaten, insult or use abusive language to a staff member of
the Department or other persons working on behalf,
or with, the Department to
provide services.
______________________________
HON JUSTICE PALMER
have received a copy of this Order. I have had it explained to me and understand
the effect of this Order and what may happen if
I contravene
Signed by the
_________________________________
JACK SHIELD
In the presence
_________________________________
_________________________________
_________________________________
_________________________________
certify that the preceding paragraph(s) comprise the reasons for decision of the
Supreme Court of Western Australia.
Associate to the Honourable
Justice Palmer
7 NOVEMBER 2025
The State of Western
Australia v Shield
[2025] WASC 348
Preliminary Hearing
Applicant’s Outline of Submissions for Restriction Order Hearing on 28
October 2025 (
Submissions
The State of Western
Australia v El Waly [No 2]
[2025] WASC 394
Garlett v The State of
Western Australia
[2022] HCA 30
(2022) 277 CLR 1.
The State of Western
Australia v Clarke [No 2]
[2023] WASC 53
HRSO Act, s 7(1) and s
BoM, Vol 4, 1551
BoM, Vol 4, 1551 [16]; BoM, Vol 3, 1504
BoM, Vol 4, 1551
BoM, Vol 4, 1552
BoM, Vol 4, 1552 [19]; BoM, Vol 3, 1505
BoM, Vol 3, 1505
BoM, Vol 4, 1552 [20]; BoM, Vol 3, 1504
BoM, Vol 4, 1552
BoM, Vol 4, 1552
BoM, Vol 4, 1552
BoM, Vol 4, 1553
BoM, Vol 4, 1552 [22], 1553
BoM, Vol 4, 1553
BoM, Vol 4, 1550
BoM, Vol 1, 5 -
BoM, Vol 3, 1401 -
BoM, Vol 1, 4 -
BoM, Vol 3, 1181 -
BoM, Vol 3, 1220 -
BoM, Vol 1,
BoM, Vol 3, 1224 -
BoM, Vol 1,
BoM, Vol 3, 1250 -
BoM, Vol 1,
BoM, Vol 1,
BoM, Vol 3, 1309 -
BoM, Vol 1,
BoM, Vol 3, 1292 -
BoM, Vol 1,
BoM, Vol 3, 1450 -
BoM, Vol 1, 1 -
BoM, Vol 3, 1462 -
BoM, Vol 1,
BoM, Vol 3, 1472 -
BoM, Vol 1,
BoM, Vol 3, 1393 -
BoM, Vol 3, 1393 -
BoM, Vol 3, 1393 -
BoM, Vol 3, 1368 -
HRSO Act, s
Dr Wynn Owen made a similar observation: BoM, Vol 4, 1559
HRSO Act, s 7(1) and
BoM, Vol 3, 1503 -
State’s Submissions, pars
BoM, Vol 3, 1506
BoM, Vol 3, 1506
BoM, Vol 3, 1506
BoM, Vol 3, 1507
BoM, Vol 3, 1509
BoM, Vol 3, 1509
BoM, Vol 3, 1509
BoM, Vol 3, 1509
BoM, Vol 3, 1509
BoM, Vol 3, 1511 - 1513.
State’s Submissions, pars
BoM, Vol 3,
BoM, Vol 3, 1511 -
BoM, Vol 3, 1526 -
State’s Submissions, pars 99 -
BoM, Vol 3, 1526 -
BoM, Vol 3,
BoM, Vol 3, 1532
BoM, Vol 3, 1532 - 1533
BoM, Vol 3, 1532-1533
BoM, Vol 3, 1532-1533
BoM, Vol 3, 1533
BoM, Vol 3, 1534
BoM, Vol 3, 1535
BoM, Vol 3, 1535
BoM, Vol 3, 1535
BoM, Vol 3, 1535
BoM, Vol 3, 1535
BoM, Vol 3, 1535
BoM, Vol 3, 1535
BoM, Vol 3, 1535 - 1536
BoM, Vol 3, 1536
BoM, Vol 3, 1536
BoM, Vol 3, 1536
BoM, Vol 3, 1536
BoM, Vol 3, 1537
BoM, Vol 3, 1537
BoM, Vol 3, 1537
BoM, Vol 4, 1544 -
State’s Submissions, pars 85 -
BoM, Vol 4,
BoM, Vol 4, 1544 -
BoM, Vol 4, 1544 - 1545
BoM, Vol 4, 1545 [6] - [7], 1546
BoM, Vol 4, 1594 -
State’s Submissions, pars 90 -
BoM, Vol 4,
BoM, Vol 4, 1596 -
BoM, Vol 4,
BoM, Vol 4, 1598 -
BoM, Vol 4,
BoM, Vol 4, 1596 -
BoM, Vol 4,
BoM, Vol 4,
BoM, Vol 4,
BoM, Vol 4,
BoM, Vol 4,
BoM, Vol 4, 1599 -
BoM, Vol 4,
BoM, Vol 4,
BoM, Vol 4,
BoM, Vol 4,
BoM, Vol 4,
BoM, Vol 4,
HRSO Act, s 7(1) and
BoM, Vol 4, 1547 -
BoM, Vol 4,
BoM, Vol 4,
BoM, Vol 4,
BoM, Vol 4, 1558 [66].
BoM, Vol 4, 1558 [67].
BoM, Vol 4, 1558 [68].
BoM, Vol 4, 1558 [68].
BoM, Vol 4, 1558 [69].
BoM, Vol 4, 1558 [69] - [70].
BoM, Vol 4, 1558 - 1559 [71].
BoM, Vol 4, 1559 [72].
BoM, Vol 4, 1559 [73].
BoM, Vol 4, 1559 [74] - [75].
BoM, Vol 4, 1559 [77] - [78].
BoM, Vol 4, 1559-1560 [79] - [80].
BoM, Vol 4, 1560 [81].
BoM, Vol 4, 1560 [82].
BoM, Vol 4, 1560 [83] - [84].
BoM, Vol 4, 1560 [85].
BoM, Vol 4, 1560 - 1561 [86] - [87].
BoM, Vol 4, 1561 [89].
BoM, Vol 4, 1561 [91] - [92].
BoM, Vol 4, 1561
BoM, Vol 4, 1561 [95] -
BoM, Vol 4, 1562
BoM, Vol 4, 1562
BoM, Vol 4, 1562
BoM, Vol 4, 1562
BoM, Vol 4, 1562-1563
BoM, Vol 4, 1563
BoM, Vol 4, 1563
BoM, Vol 4, 1563
BoM, Vol 4, 1564
BoM, Vol 4, 1564
BoM, Vol 4, 1564
BoM, Vol 4, 1565
BoM, Vol 4, 1565 [i] -
BoM, Vol 4, 1565
BoM, Vol 4, 1566 -
BoM, Vol 4, 1567
BoM, Vol 4, 1592
BoM, Vol 4, 1583
BoM, Vol 4, 1583
BoM, Vol 4, 1583
BoM, Vol 4, 1583
BoM, Vol 4, 1584
BoM, Vol 4, 1584
BoM, Vol 4, 1584
BoM, Vol 4, 1586
BoM, Vol 4, 1585
BoM, Vol 4, 1585 - 1586
BoM, Vol 4, 1586
BoM, Vol 4, 1586
BoM, Vol 4, 1586
BoM, Vol 4, 1586
BoM, Vol 4, 1590
BoM, Vol 4, 1586
BoM, Vol 4, 1587
BoM, Vol 4, 1587
BoM, Vol 4, 1587
BoM, Vol 4, 1587
BoM, Vol 4, 1587
BoM, Vol 4, 1588
BoM, Vol 4, 1588
BoM, Vol 4, 1588
BoM, Vol 4, 1588
BoM, Vol 4, 1588
BoM, Vol 4, 1589
BoM, Vol 4, 1589
BoM, Vol 4, 1589
BoM, Vol 4, 1589
BoM, Vol 4, 1589
BoM, Vol 4, 1590
BoM, Vol 4, 1590
BoM, Vol 4, 1590
BoM, Vol 4, 1590
BoM, Vol 4, 1590
BoM, Vol 4, 1590 - 1591
BoM, Vol 4, 1591
BoM, Vol 4, 1591
BoM, Vol 4, 1591
BoM, Vol 4, 1591
BoM, Vol 4, 1591
BoM, Vol 4, 1592
BoM, Vol 4, 1592
BoM, Vol 4, 1593
BoM, Vol 4, 1593
BoM, Vol 4, 1593
HRSO Act, s
HRSO Act, s
BoM, Vol 3, 1534
BoM, Vol 3, 1535
BoM, Vol 3, 1533
Preliminary Hearing Reasons
Dr Wynn Owen: BoM, Vol 4, 1565 [i]-[ii]. Dr Bannister: BoM, Vol 4, 1593
HRSO Act, s
BoM, Vol 3,
State’s Submissions par, 135.
HRSO Act, s
HRSO Act, s
HRSO Act, s
BoM, Vol 3, 1535
BoM, Vol 4, 1564 [110].
BoM, Vol 4, 1592 [102].
[73] (Kiefel CJ, Keane and Steward JJ);
State of Western Australia v Hansen [No
[2025] WASC 4
State of Western Australia v Williams [No
[2024] WASC 215
[39] - [40].
at [30] (Fiannaca J). See also
comments re post-sentence supervision order under the
Sentence Administration
, as noted by Edelman J in
[226]-[228] and Quinlan CJ in
State of Western Australia v D'Rozario [No
[2021] WASC 412
of Public Prosecutions (WA) v
[2008] WASCA 187
[21] (Steytler P and
State’s Submissions, par
Dr Wynn Owen: ts 31 - ts 33; Dr Bannister: ts 44 - ts
ts 55 - ts 56.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (0.991 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter