URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WAICmr/2024/16.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:03:51
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Local Government Elected Members Association Inc and Western Australian Local Government Association, Re [2024] WAICmr 16 (20 December 2024)
OFFICE OF THE INFORMATION COMMISSIONER (W.A.)
File Ref: F2023056
Decision Ref: D0162024
Participants:
Local Government Elected Members’
Association Inc
Complainant
Western Australian Local Government Association
DECISION AND REASONS FOR DECISION
FREEDOM OF INFORMATION – refusal of access – right of access to
the documents of an ‘agency’– meaning
of ‘agency’
– meaning of ‘public body or office’ – whether
respondent is a ‘public body
Freedom of Information Act 1992
Corporations (Western Australia) Act 1990
Court Security and Custodial Services Act 1999
Fluoridation of Public Water Supplies Act 1966
Freedom of Information Act 1992
Interpretation Act
Local Government Act 1995
Planning and Development Act 2005
Prisons Act 1981
State Records Act 2000
Channel 31 Community Educational Television Ltd v
[2001] WASCA 405
Local Government Association of
Queensland Inc v Information Commissioner & Anor
Re Brennan and the Law Society of the Australian Capital
[1985] AATA 163
(5 July 1985)
Renmark Hotel Inc
v Federal Commissioner of Taxation
(1949) 79 CLR 11
Australian Turf Club v Federal Commissioner of Taxation
[1913] VicLawRp 26
(1978) 19 ALR
The respondent’s decision to refuse the complainant access to the
requested documents is set aside. In substitution, I find
that the respondent
is not an agency as defined in the Glossary to the
Freedom of Information Act
(WA) and, as a result, the complainant has no right of access to the
requested documents under the
Freedom of Information Act 1992
Catherine Fletcher
INFORMATION COMMISSIONER
20 December 2024
REASONS FOR DECISION
application for external review arises from a decision made by the Western
Australian Local Government Association (
) to refuse the Local
Government Elected Members’ Association Inc (
the complainant
access to documents under the
Freedom of Information Act 1992
the FOI Act
December 2022, the complainant wrote to WALGA requesting certain information
panels and other
organizations. The information to which the complainant sought access included
a list of bodies to which WALGA
makes nominations; the names of current WALGA
nominees and their renumeration; and a copy of certain related minutes. WALGA
a substantive response, outlining the nomination and selection process.
WALGA otherwise advised that it was unable to provide the
requested information
and documents for the reasons given to the complainant.
7 January 2023, the complainant sought to make an ‘FOI request’ to
WALGA in the following terms:
Thank you for your prompt response on
23 December 2022 to our request for information about WALGA nomination and
selection of committee
members sent to you 15 December 2022.
We regret that your response does not respond to our information requests, as
copied below.
I now make that request formally pursuant to the FOI Act s.12 as follows:
I write to request information about WALGA nominations to State government
committees, panels and other organisations to which WALGA
makes nominations for
membership as follows:
you please provide a list of bodies to which WALGA makes nominations?
you please advise us of the names of current WALGA nominees who sit on such
bodies and the remuneration they receive from those
appointments?
you please provide the minutes for the last 24 months of the WALGA committee
responsible for deciding which persons are nominated,
redacted as permitted
under the FOI
Please advise me
most relevance to the access provisions of the FOI Act and to this office is the
part of the request seeking access to specifically
described documents
requested documents
letter dated 2 February 2023, WALGA gave to the complainant a copy of documents
addressing items one and two in the list above.
However, with respect to item
three, WALGA advised:
As per [clause] 3 of Schedule 1 of the
of Information Act 1992
, minutes of the committee are exempt as they contain
personal information.
WALGA referred to a specific provision of the FOI Act as grounds for its
decision not to give access to certain documents,
WALGA did not specifically
state whether it accepted, or did not accept, that it is an agency subject to
the FOI Act.
15 February 2023, the complainant wrote to my office requesting external review
of WALGA’s decision.
REVIEW BY THE INFORMATION
COMMISSIONER
letter dated 21 March 2023, I wrote to WALGA:
that I had received an application for external review in this matter but was
yet to formally decide whether to deal with
the application as a complaint under
section 65 of the FOI Act against a decision of WALGA;
that, based on the information then before me, I was inclined to proceed on the
basis that the complainant had made an access
application under the FOI Act and
that WALGA has made a decision under the FOI Act to refuse access to the
requested documents;
information from WALGA as to whether it accepts or disputes that it is an agency
under the FOI Act; and
requesting,
in the event that WALGA disputed that it is an agency under the FOI Act, that
WALGA provide me with written submissions
in support of that
letter dated 18 April 2023, WALGA stated that it ‘wish[ed] to advise that
WALGA accepts that it is a ‘public body’
and therefore subject to
the application of the FOI Act.’ WALGA did not provide any substantive
submissions in support of
its position, including in relation to several
specific issues on which I invited its submissions.
letter dated 22 November 2023, I advised the parties that, following receipt of
WALGA’s 18 April 2023 letter, I had given
careful consideration to whether
I should, in the circumstances, proceed on the basis that WALGA is an agency
under the FOI Act and
that I have jurisdiction to deal with the application for
external review. I summarised the conclusions of some relevant preliminary
research carried out by my legal staff and stated that, notwithstanding
WALGA’s apparent acceptance that it is an agency under
the FOI Act, I was
not persuaded that there was sufficient information before me to proceed on the
basis that WALGA is an agency
under the FOI Act and that I have jurisdiction to
deal with this application for external review.
advised the parties that, in the circumstances, I considered it necessary to
make a formal determination as to whether or not WALGA
is an agency under the
FOI Act, following a proper consideration of all the material before me,
including further submissions from
the parties.
did not provide any substantive submissions in response to my 22 November 2023
letter. Instead, by letter dated 16 January
2024, WALGA advised me
[f]ollowing a review of your letters, I wish to advise that
WALGA does not hold a firm view on the issue of whether or not WALGA is
agency, as defined in the Glossary to the
Freedom of Information Act 1992
(FOI Act), and therefore subject to the application of the FOI Act.
WALGA will respect the Commissioner’s decision about the matter.
15 December 2023, the complainant provided detailed written submissions to my
office in support of its claim that WALGA is an agency
under the FOI Act
the complainant’s submissions
IS WALGA AN
‘AGENCY’ FOR THE PURPOSES OF THE FOI ACT?
question for my determination is whether WALGA is an ‘agency’ as
defined in the Glossary to the FOI Act.
complainant submits that WALGA is an agency. As noted above, WALGA’s
position is that it does not hold a firm view on the
matter and will abide my
decision as to whether or not it is an agency. I consider that for me to
exercise my statutory powers and
functions, I must be satisfied that the entity
in question is, in fact, an agency for the purposes of the FOI Act.
3(1) of the FOI Act states:
The objects of this Act are to
(a) enable the public to participate more effectively in governing the State;
(b) make the persons and bodies that are responsible for State and local
government more accountable to the public.
10 of the FOI Act creates a right for a person to be given access to the
documents of an agency (other than an exempt agency)
subject to and in
accordance with the FOI Act.
WALGA is not an agency within the meaning of the FOI Act, then the FOI Act does
not apply and the complainant has no right of access
to the requested documents
under the FOI Act.
term ‘agency’ is defined in the Glossary to the FOI Act to
(a) a Minister; or
(b) a public body or office.
Glossary further defines ‘public body or office’ to mean:
(a) a department of the Public Service;
(b) an organization specified in column 2 of Schedule 2 to the
Public Sector
Management Act 1994
(c) the Police Force of Western Australia;
(d) a local government or a regional local government;
(e) a body or office that is established for a public purpose under a written
(f) a body or office that is established by the Governor or a Minister;
(g) any other body or office that is declared by the regulations to be a public
body or office being –
(i) a body or office established under a written law; or
(ii) a corporation or association over which control can be exercised by the
State, a Minister, a body referred to in paragraph (a),
(b), (e), (f) or (g)(i),
or the holder of an office referred to in paragraph (f) or (g)(i); or
(h) a contractor or subcontractor.
law’ is defined in
Interpretation Act 1984
Interpretation Act
) to mean, ‘all Acts for the time being in force
and all subsidiary legislation for the time being in force.’
definitions of the terms ‘contractor’ and
‘subcontractor’ in the Glossary to the FOI Act make it clear
is only persons who provide services within the prison system under the
Security and Custodial Services Act 1999
Prisons Act
(WA) who are covered by paragraph (h) above.
be an ‘agency’ for the purposes of the FOI Act, WALGA must come
within one of the categories in paragraphs (a)–(h)
of the definition of
‘public body or office’ in the Glossary to the FOI Act. In my view,
in the circumstances of this
matter, the only category which could apply is
paragraph (e) of that definition (
paragraph (e)
complainant’s submissions
complainant provided a 24-page written submission to this office in support of
its contention that WALGA is an agency for the
purposes of the FOI Act.
have examined all of the complainant’s submissions and consider that not
all are relevant to the matter for my determination.
I have summarised the
complainant’s relevant submissions below:
31 Community Educational Television Ltd v Inglis
[2001] WASCA 405
is not binding on my office. Alternatively,
stands only for the proposition that Channel 31 is not an agency.
Government Association of Queensland Inc v Information Commissioner &
[2001] QSC 52 (
) is binding on my office.
Alternatively, it is highly persuasive.
any case, WALGA has exceptional powers of the type required by the Supreme Court
of Western Australia in
for an entity to be considered an
‘agency’, conferred by the statute under which it is established,
may of its own motion make representations and submissions to the Minister on
any matter or thing relating to or affecting its
members (sec 9.58(6)(a)
Local Government Act 1995
may with the approval of the affected members, arrange contracts of insurance on
behalf of all or any of its members for any
purpose (sec 9.58(6)(b) LG
service benefits for employees of WALGA are to be provided in accordance with
regulations (sec 5.48(2) LG Act);
is to establish and manage, for the benefit of itself and any eligible body that
chooses to participate, a group self-insurance
arrangement against liability to
pay compensation under the
Workers' Compensation and Injury Management Act
(WA) (sec 5.49(2) LG Act);
is established under the LG Act with the objects and functions set out in its
constitution (sec 9.58(3) LG Act). The objects
in the WALGA constitution are
clearly for public purposes.
influence and voice in the WA system of local government is wide ranging and
pervasive’. This includes
WALGA’s representation of the local
government sector on various committees and working groups, 35 of which are
listed in the
complainant’s
submissions.
is considered a government organization for the purposes of the
State Records
). The complainant
[T]he fact that the [State Records Office] has
recognised WALGA as a body established for a public purpose overcomes any common
precedent that holds otherwise.
In the alternative ... the [SR Act] subsidiary legislation being the Standard
is highly persuasive in deciding WALGA is an agency
for the purpose of the FOI
Interpretation Act
requires that in the interpretation of a
written law, a construction that would promote the purpose or object underlying
the written
law (whether that purpose or object is expressly stated in the
written law or not) shall be preferred to a construction that would
not promote
that purpose or object. The complainant submits:
interpretation of the provisions of the FOI Act WA, a construction that WALGA is
a body which is part of a system of local
government serving a public purpose
whose public affairs relating to local government should be open to public
scrutiny, would promote
the FOI Act WA’s remedial purpose, even if that
remedial purpose is not expressly stated in the FOI Act WA. Accordingly, WALGA
being interpreted to be an agency for the purpose of the FOI Act WA must be
preferred to a construction that would not promote that
remedial purpose.
WALGA’s submissions
noted above, WALGA declined my request to provide submissions in relation to its
status as an agency under the FOI Act and stated
it would abide my determination
as to whether or not it is an agency for the purposes of the FOI Act.
Consideration
to the interpretation of the definition of a ‘body or office that is
established for a public purpose under a written
law’ in paragraph (e) is
contained in
, in which Hasluck J
[I]t is not simply a question of whether there is a written
law... which enables the body to function. The crucial question is whether
establishment of the body and the public purpose for which it exists is
explicitly referable to and carried into effect by or
pursuant to a written
that case, the body under consideration, Channel 31, was a company limited by
guarantee and registered under the
Corporations (Western Australia) Act
(WA). It had been issued a licence relating to community broadcasting
Broadcasting Services Act 1992
(Cth). By its memorandum and
articles, the objects of Channel 31’s establishment were stated to be
public educational purposes,
not private commercial purposes. Channel 31
established and operated a broad-based community television station with active
participation. Furthermore, benefits flowed to the relevant tertiary
institutions associated with Channel 31, those tertiary institutions
themselves established for public purposes. However, none of these
characteristics were determined by the enabling legislation.
Ultimately, the
Supreme Court of Western Australia found that Channel 31 was not a body
‘established for a public purpose under
It is apparent from
, that the objects of the [FOI Act] are to be achieved
by creating a general right of access to State and local government documents.
The right of access is constituted by
in respect of the documents of an
The provisions of the
Freedom of Information Act
do not suggest that
institutions other than governmental agencies are required to provide access to
their records, and indeed the
contrary is suggested by the way in which the
objects of the Act are confined to agencies involved in the process of
government.
Channel 31 has no
special or regulatory powers conferred upon it
by a particular statute or written law
and I am therefore not satisfied that
it can be characterized as a body “established for a public purpose under
a written law.”
J also reviewed the case law and gave consideration to the characteristics of
‘public purposes.’ His Honour stated:
[I]f the powers
available to a body by its domestic constitution are no greater than those
available to an individual and have not
been specially conferred by government,
then, consistently with the reasoning in [
Renmark Hotel Inc v Federal
Commissioner of Taxation
(1949) 79 CLR 11
would be a basis for concluding that the body did not have a public purpose.
Such a conclusion would be further reinforced
if it were apparent that the
government or electors played no part in the appointment of the governing
committee. The
(supra) case shows that this conclusion is not
displaced by the fact that the body in question is not a profit making
and confers benefits upon the
Honour included the following quote from
characteristics of a public authority seem to be that it should carry on some
undertaking of a public nature for the benefit of
the community or of some
section of the community and that it should have some governmental authority to
do so... Coercive powers
over the individual are given to many governmental
authorities which could be called public authorities, but it is not an essential
part of a conception of a public authority that it should have coercive powers,
whether of an administrative or a legislative character.
It may, however, be an
essential characteristic of the conception that it should have exceptional
powers or authority, for instance
a tramway board or trust has the exceptional
authority of taking its trams down a public street. A water authority may lay
mains, a lighting authority may do the like. Some
exceptional
powers of doing what an ordinary private individual may not do
are generally
found in any body which we would describe as a public authority... [emphasis
[The appellant] has no statutory powers enabling it to do what a private
individual could not do. The elements upon which the appellant
relies for the
claim to be a public authority are restrictive, not enabling. They consist of
provisions of the law and of documents
adopted under the law directed to confine
its activities to public purposes.
Honour also considered the objects of the FOI Act in determining whether a body
is an agency under the FOI Act and stated at [48]:
...The central
idea reflected in the objects of the [FOI] Act is that persons and bodies
responsible for State and local government
are to be made more accountable to
the public. It is inconsistent with such a notion to hold that an incorporated
body such as Channel
31, which does not exercise regulatory powers, or carry
into effect governmental decisions, should be regarded as an
within the meaning of the
the public purposes of an entity must be set out in the legislation establishing
that entity was an argument advanced by Counsel
for Channel 31 in
Hasluck J indicated he was persuaded by those
and ultimately held that
Channel 31 was not a body established for a public purpose under a written law
and therefore not an agency
under the FOI Act.
is binding on my office, respectfully, I agree with Hasluck
J’s approach and consider that
public purposes for a paragraph (e) public body or office need to be found in
the statute establishing the body or office; and
public purposes must be able to be characterized as ‘exceptional’,
‘special’ or ‘regulatory’
, the Supreme Court of Queensland considered a question similar to
the matter presently before me. In that case, Ronald Price had
application under the
Freedom of Information Act 1992
Queensland FOI Act
) to the Local Government Association of Queensland
LGA Queensland
). LGA Queensland asserted it was not subject to the
Queensland FOI Act. The Queensland Information Commissioner determined on
review that LGA Queensland is a body established for a public purpose
under an enactment; an agency for the purpose of the Queensland
FOI Act; and
that the Queensland FOI Commissioner had jurisdiction to deal with the
application for external review. LGA Queensland
appealed the Queensland
Information Commissioner’s decision to the Supreme Court of Queensland.
, Atkinson J was not persuaded it was necessary for the public
purpose to be set out in the enactment by which the relevant body is
established. Her Honour was satisfied that all members of the LGA Queensland
(being local governments and Aboriginal Councils),
as opposed to LGA Queensland
itself, were established for public purposes and that those purposes were set
out in relevant legislation.
Her Honour added:
It would seem to be
almost inevitable that an association whose only members are bodies established
for public purposes would itself
be established for a public purpose. The
objects set out in [the LGA Queensland]
Constitution
and Rules confirm that this
Honour also stated:
The Local Government Association was established
both by an enactment and for a public purpose. The purpose set out in the rules
incorporated into the enactment by s 799 of the 1993 Act although not
set out in the enactment. The association was therefore established
for a public
purpose by an enactment and is a public authority subject to the
This is enough to dispose of the application. In this case, however, even if
the applicant were correct in its argument that the body
which is established
for a public purpose by an enactment must have the public purpose set out in the
enactment by which it is established,
that criterion is satisfied in this case.
Section 1194, by which the Local Government Association was established, is
found in Pt 1 of Ch 18 of the 1993 Act which deals generally
with the Local
Government Association. Section 1195 sets out how the Local Government
Association may make rules. The section provides
that while a rule is not
subordinate legislation it has effect only if approved by the Governor in
Council. If the Governor in Council
approves the rule, notice of the approval
and of the rule must be published in the Gazette. Section 1196 provides that the
Government Association may pay amounts towards expenses of litigation for
matters of common interest to local governments. The remaining
sections in Ch 18
Pt I provide for when payments by local governments are payable to the Local
Government Association and the keeping
of accounts by the Local Government
Association.
These provisions, in particular s 1196, show that the Local Government
Association has been established for a public purpose and that
public purpose is
set out in the enactment. Payment for the conduct of litigation which is for
matters of common interest to local
government, for example, is clearly a public
purpose as local governments are themselves established for the public purpose
government.
is a decision from a superior Court in another State with similar facts, albeit
considering freedom of information legislation in
another Australian
now turn to the relevant provisions of the LG Act.
9.58 of the LG Act states:
(1) The Western Australian Local Government Association (“WALGA”) is
constituted as a body corporate with perpetual succession
and a common seal.
(2) Proceedings may be taken by or against WALGA in its corporate name.
(3) WALGA has the objects and functions set out in its constitution.
(4) Subject to subsection (5), WALGA may, at any time, amend its constitution
and, whenever it does, it is to forthwith —
(a) give to the Minister; and
(b) lodge with the Commissioner as defined in the
Fair Trading Act 2010
a copy of the amendment to the constitution.
(5) WALGA is not to change the objects for which it is constituted without
the approval of the Minister.
(6) Without limiting the generality of subsection (3), WALGA may —
(a) of its own motion, make representations and submissions to the Minister on
any matter or thing relating to or affecting its members;
(b) with the approval of the affected members, arrange contracts of insurance on
behalf of all or any of its members for any purpose.
(7) WALGA may do all things necessary or convenient to be done to enable it
to achieve its objects and perform its functions.
am satisfied that WALGA is established pursuant to section 9.58(1) of the LG Act
and is therefore established ‘under a written
consider that any public purposes which would make WALGA a paragraph (e) public
body or office would need to be found within the
LG Act. I consider this is
consistent with
and is, respectfully, the correct approach.
set out above, the complainant submits that sections 9.58(6)(a), 9.58(6)(b),
5.48(2) and 5.49(2) of the LG Act are examples of
such public purposes.
5.48(2) of the LG Act states, ‘Long service benefits for [WALGA] employees
are to be provided in accordance with regulations.’
5.49(2) of the LG Act states:
WALGA is to establish and manage, for
the benefit of itself and any eligible body that chooses to participate, a group
self-insurance
arrangement against liability to pay compensation under the WCIM
also has the objects and functions set out in its constitution by virtue of
section 9.58(3) of the LG Act.
, I have turned my mind to whether these purposes confer some
‘exceptional’, ‘special’ or ‘regulatory’
powers or functions.
objects are set out in clause 3 of its constitution and are:
(a) to provide a united voice for Local Government in Western Australia;
(b) to promote the credibility and profile of Local Government;
(c) to speak on behalf of Local Government in Western Australia;
(d) to represent the views of the Association to the State and Federal
Governments on financial, legislative, administration and
policy matters;
(e) to provide services to Local Government in Western Australia;
(f) to promote Local Government issues of importance by involvement with
national bodies;
(g) to do all and any such other things as in the opinion of the State Council
may conveniently be carried on by the Association
or which promote or assist or
are incidental or conducive to the attainment of these objects or any of them,
or anything considered
beneficial to the members of the Association; and
(h) to use the property and income of the Association solely for the promotion
of the objects or purposes of the Association. No
part of the property or income
of the Association may be paid or otherwise distributed, directly or indirectly,
to members of the
Association, except in good faith in the promotion of those
objects or purposes.
Considering
the powers or functions set out in sections 9.58(6)(a), 9.58(6)(b), 5.48(2) and
5.49(2) of the LG Act as well as the objects
imported from WALGA’s
constitution, on balance, I do not consider any of those provisions have the
character of ‘exceptional’,
‘special’ or
‘regulatory’ powers or functions.
statutory powers or functions are largely permissive – they allow WALGA to
do certain things but do not require
it to do anything. That is to be
contrasted with statutory functions of the type given to, for example, a Law
Society which regulates
the legal profession, or responsibilities given to a
turf club to licence racehorses.
exception is the requirement in section 5.49(2) of the LG Act to
‘establish and manage for the benefit of itself ... a group
self-insurance
arrangement against liability to pay compensation under the
Compensation and Injury Management Act 1981
(WA).’ It is arguable the
requirement to provide long service benefits for employees of WALGA in section
5.48(2) of the LG
Act also falls into this category. However, despite being
framed as requirements, I do not consider these provisions have the character
‘exceptional’, ‘special’ or ‘regulatory’
powers or functions.
the extent that WALGA may have the capacity to influence government through
advocacy, including through its membership on government
committees, I do not
consider this to be materially different from other interest groups which may
lobby government on matters affecting
their members or supporters. That a body
seeks to advocate to government does not, of itself, mean that body will be
the FOI Act. To take one example, under
section 5(3)
Fluoridation of Public Water Supplies Act 1966
(WA), three members of the
Fluoridation of Public Water Supplies Advisory Committee (
) are to be appointed by the Minister from names put forward by the
Australian Medical Association (Western Australian Branch) (
Australian Dental Association (Western Australian Branch) (
WALGA. Neither AMAWA nor ADAWA is an agency for the purposes of the FOI Act.
note that in
, the Court found that a body similar to WALGA did have
public purposes in circumstances that were broadly similar. However, as noted
above, that decision is not binding on me as it is from a different
did not give close
consideration to the characteristics of ‘public purposes’ in the
manner the Court did in
. Furthermore, the decision in
was an appeal against a decision of
this office and gave close consideration to the provisions of the FOI Act in
Western Australia.
It is arguable that
is binding on my office.
Even if it is not (for example, if the decision held only that Channel 31 is not
an ‘agency’
and does not otherwise have a
ratio decidendi
relevant to the issue for my determination), I in any event respectfully agree
with the approach taken by the Court, in particular
in relation to the matters
set out at [34] above, and have applied it to this matter.
summary, I am not satisfied WALGA’s statutory purposes are properly
characterized as ‘exceptional’, ‘special’
‘regulatory’ powers or functions in the way that term is used in
. In my view, WALGA is better described as an advocacy body for
local government with some statutorily conferred functions consistent
role. However, I do not consider that those functions rise to the level
required to establish that WALGA’s purposes
are public purposes, as
required by paragraph (e).
have considered the complainant’s submission that WALGA is recognised as a
body established for a public purpose by a written
law for the purposes of the
note that WALGA’s 2023-24 annual report states that, in the reporting
period, its Record Keeping Plan 2024-29 was submitted
and approved by the State
Records Commission (
the Commission
), in compliance with section 19 of the
observe that section 19 of the SR Act provides that ‘[e]very government
organization must have a record keeping plan that
has been approved by the
Commission under section
‘Government
organization’ is defined in section 3 of the SR Act to mean ‘an
organization in Schedule 1 but does
not include an organization in Schedule
note that the organizations listed in Schedule 1 to the SR Act include, at item
9, ‘[a]n incorporated or unincorporated body
established or continued for
a public purpose under a written law.’ I recognise that item 9 is cast in
almost identical terms
to paragraph (e) of the definition of ‘public body
or office’ in the Glossary to the FOI Act.
understand the Commission first approved a record keeping plan for WALGA in
2016. I have not inquired into how it came to pass
that WALGA submitted a
record keeping plan to the Commission for approval or on what basis WALGA was,
or is, regarded as a government
organization for the purposes of the SR Act
(apart from noting the points stated in [56] above and in this paragraph).
also observe that, from at least 2009 until as recently as 1 April 2024,
WALGA’s website stated that it is not a government
department or
By way of comment, I
consider it is somewhat anomalous that WALGA has been complying with obligations
that apply to government organizations
under the SR Act since at least 2016 and
yet continued to state on its website that it is not a government department or
consider that even if WALGA is a government organization for the purposes of the
SR Act, that is not determinative of whether WALGA
is an agency for the purposes
of the FOI Act. In determining the issue before me, I am required to consider
all of the material
before me which includes the decision in
the guidance provided by the Court regarding the interpretation of paragraph (e)
of the definition of ‘public body or office’
in the Glossary to the
noted at [25g.] above,
Interpretation Act
that, in the interpretation of a written law, a construction that would promote
the purpose or object underlying the written
law (whether that purpose or object
is expressly stated in the written law or not) shall be preferred to a
construction that would
not promote that purpose or object.
objects of the FOI Act, cited at [16] of this decision, are to enable the public
to participate more effectively in governing
the State and to make the persons
and bodies that are responsible for State and local government more accountable
to the public.
light of my views expressed at [54] and the comments of Hasluck J at
[54]–[55] of
, cited at [29] of this decision, I do not
consider that access to the documents of WALGA under the FOI Act would promote
the objects
of the FOI Act.
considered all of the material before me, I am not satisfied that WALGA is a
body or office established for a public purpose
under a written law as defined
in paragraph (e) of the definition of a ‘public body or office’ in
the Glossary to the
find that WALGA is not an agency as defined in the Glossary to the FOI Act. As
a result, the complainant has no right of access
to the requested documents
under the FOI Act.
***************************
The numbering in the list has
been added by my office for ease of
The complainant
stated on page 5 of their submissions that the State Government is required to
consult WALGA in relation to planning
policy pursuant to
section 28(1)(b)
Planning and Development Act 2005
provision, however, does not exist in the current version of that Act and
although ‘WALGA’ is defined in
that Act, it is not otherwise
referred to in that piece of legislation. See
and Development Act 2005 -
[04-ab0-00].pdf
citing Rich J in
Renmark Hotel Inc v Commissioner of Taxation
at page 18f.
See for example
Re Brennan and the Law Society of the Australian Capital Territory
(5 July 1985) and
Western Australian Turf Club v Federal
Commissioner of Taxation
[1913] VicLawRp 26
(1978) 19 ALR
https://walga.asn.au/awcontent/Web/Documents/Advocacy/WAL15498-Annual-Report-2023-24.pdf
As Information
Commissioner, I am an ex-officio member of the Commission by virtue of section
58 of the SR Act.
https://web.archive.org/web/20090214024256/http://walga.asn.au/
https://web.archive.org/web/20240401073402/https://walga.asn.au/
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (266 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter