URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WADC/2025/82.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:03:07
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
THE STATE OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA -v- FRIGGER [No 3] [2025] WADC 82 (14 November 2025)
DISTRICT COURT OF WESTERN
IN CRIMINAL
THE STATE OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA -v- FRIGGER [No 3] [2025]
LONSDALE DCJ
7-10 & 14-17 OCTOBER 2025
DELIVERED :
PUBLISHED :
14 NOVEMBER 2025
FILE NO/S :
IND 1112 of 2019
THE STATE OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
ANGELA CECILIA THERESA FRIGGER
Breach of bail - Summary trial - Trial by judge
Legislation:
Bail Act 1982
Criminal Procedure Act 2004
Criminal Procedure Rules 2005
Evidence Act 1906
Accused found guilty
Representation:
The State of Western Australia
Mr S Mullins & Ms I J Hamilton
Solicitors:
The State of Western Australia
State Director of Public Prosecutions
Not applicable
Case(s) referred to in decision(s):
[This decision was delivered extemporaneously on 17 October 2025. It
has been edited from the transcript to correct minor errors,
matters of grammar
and infelicities of expression.]
4 June 2024 the accused was convicted following a trial before
Judge Gething DCJ (as he then was) and a jury. She was granted
attendance on 5 June 2024 but she failed to attend
in accordance with that
undertaking.
accused is charged under
Bail Act 1982
failing to comply with a condition of bail without reasonable
She pleaded
not guilty and the trial commenced before me on 7 October 2025.
provides that, where an accused is required to
appear before the District Court, a breach of bail should be dealt with by
of that court. Further,
provides that a charge under
is to be tried
Relevant principles of law
same principles of law and procedure apply as if the trial were to be held
before a jury. I may make any findings and give any
verdict that a jury could
judgment must include the principles of law I have applied and the findings of
fact upon which I have relied: s 119 and s 120
Criminal Procedure Act
must proceed on the basis that the accused is presumed to be innocent. The onus
is on the State to prove the elements of the offence
beyond reasonable doubt.
The accused bears no onus of proof.
the State has failed to prove every element of the offence beyond reasonable
doubt, the accused must be acquitted.
verdict must be based on the evidence. I must not speculate about matters which
are not in evidence.
must assess the credibility and reliability of each witness who has given
evidence. I must do so dispassionately. I must not
decide the case on sympathy
for or prejudice towards any person.
remind myself that an accused person has a right to remain silent. An
accused person is not obliged to give evidence or call any
evidence. In this
case, the accused elected not to give or call any evidence. The fact
that the accused chose not to give evidence
does not detract from the important
principles in our system of law that the onus is on the prosecution to prove a
charge and the
accused is presumed to be innocent. An accused person remains
innocent unless and until the charge against her has been proven beyond
reasonable doubt.
fact that the accused chose not to give evidence cannot be used to fill any gaps
in the prosecution case.
may consider any submissions made by the State and the accused, but I must be
mindful that submissions are not evidence. I must
not draw an inference
that the accused is guilty because she elected not to give or call any
as the State relies on circumstantial evidence - that is, evidence of
a fact or a combination of facts from which another
fact can be
inferred - I must not draw an inference against the accused unless it
is the only reasonable inference that can be drawn.
I must draw inferences most
favourable to the accused.
The elements of the offence
prosecution case is that the accused committed an offence under
, which provides:
to comply with bail undertaking, offence
accused who, without reasonable cause, fails to comply with the requirement of
his bail undertaking mentioned in
section 28(2)(a)
commits an offence.
Section 28(1)
relevantly provide:
of bail undertaking and when required
(1) An accused
shall not be released on bail for an appearance in court unless the accused has
entered into a bail undertaking for
that appearance or is deemed to have done so
section 31(3).
(2) A bail undertaking is an undertaking in writing by an accused in the
prescribed form -
(a) that the accused will appear at a time and place specified, or deemed by
section 31(3)
to be specified, in the undertaking; and
, when read together, mean that there are three elements
of an offence under
in addition to
the element of identity. The State must prove beyond reasonable doubt that the
accused entered a bail undertaking,
that she failed to comply with a requirement
of her bail undertaking, and did so without reasonable cause. In this case, the
prosecution
must prove the following:
(a) that the accused was the
person who failed to do the relevant act or acts constituting the breach, (the
identity question);
(b) that the accused entered into a bail undertaking to appear in the
District Court at the time and place specified or deemed by
to be specified;
(c) that the accused failed to appear in answer to her bail at the
District Court on 5 June 2024; and
(d) that the accused failed to appear without reasonable cause.
Section 51(2)
, proscribes
a statutory alternative to a charge under
An offence under
, read with
creates an offence where a person fails
to appear as soon as practicable after they are required to attend.
I find the accused guilty under
, I would not be required to
consider the statutory alternative.
Procedural matters - objections to the evidence
to the commencement of the hearing, the accused filed over 80 pages of
objections to the evidence and renewed those objections
orally during the
hearing. The accused asserted that evidence from Perth Airport, the
Australian Border Force and the Department
of Foreign Affairs and Trade as
to her movements from 5 June 2024 was 'illegally obtained'. She asserted
that the police had breached,
inter alia, the
Surveillance Devices
Migration Act 1958
(Cth) and the
Australian Border Force Act
objections to evidence on the grounds of illegally obtained evidence raised the
possibility that it would be necessary to hear
evidence bearing on that
question. To avoid the prospect of having to hear the evidence twice, the
accused and the State agreed
that I should hear the evidence once, subject to me
ruling on the issue of admissibility and weight at a later
the course of the trial, I made a number of rulings. At the conclusion of
the evidence and before the State closed its case,
I ruled against the
accused on her objections and gave oral reasons. Those reasons appear in
the transcript and I do not intend
to repeat them
In short, the
contention that the prosecution evidence was based on illegally obtained
evidence is without merit.
Overview of the evidence
State called a number of witnesses. Those witnesses included
Ewan Christie, (the former associate to his Honour Gething DCJ),
Jayson Haines, (an employee of Perth Airport), Michael Spencer,
(an employee of Border Force), Constable Liam Pratt and Sergeant
Nicholas Berragan of the Western Australia Police Force
and Elise James from the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade.
of exhibits were tendered through those witnesses.
the conclusion of the State case, the accused submitted that there was no case
to answer and I ruled against her. My reasons
for so ruling appear in the
transcript of
proceedings.
not intend to repeat my ruling here.
ruling on the accused's no case submission, I then heard submissions from the
State and the accused concerning whether the
accused would be permitted to call
evidence from a clinical psychologist. I ruled that the proposed
evidence was not
admissible.
accused then elected not to give evidence in her own defence or call any
The witnesses for the prosecution were credible and reliable and I accept their
accept that each of the prosecution witnesses gave truthful and reliable
evidence. To the extent that there may have on occasion
been a discrepancy
between their recollections and the documents produced, my findings of their
credibility are not diminished.
I accept the evidence of the State witnesses in
their entirety.
Mr Christie was a credible and reliable witness
Mrs Frigger
cross-examined each of the witnesses at length. In particular, she sought
to challenge the evidence of Mr Christie.
I found Mr Christie to
be an impressive witness. His evidence was clear, measured and thoughtful. He
was willing to make concessions
when he could not remember precise details. The
accused repeatedly and without foundation accused Mr Christie of lying.
Mr Christie
was respectful and dignified in his denials.
the extent that Mr Christie admitted some failure of memory in relation to
certain details, this could be expected, given the
effluxion of time. However,
Mr Christie's memory of important events was not seriously challenged. I
found his evidence to be consistent
with the record of proceedings contained in
the transcript, the bail papers, the arrest warrant and other records
produced in evidence.
State tendered a transcript of proceedings before Judge Gething together
with a certificate under
Evidence Act 1906
certifying the transcript as evidence of the contents of the recording of
those proceedings.
The State also tendered and played the audio of proceedings following the jury
verdict on 4 June
Findings of fact
regard to the evidence led and which I accept, I find the following facts proven
beyond reasonable doubt.
The trial and the bail undertaking
accused appeared in the District Court of Western Australia on
4 June 2024 where she was convicted following a trial by jury
his Honour Judge Gething DCJ of one count of knowingly making a false
statement in an
accused represented herself at the trial. The transcript of the last day of
included the
transcription of the accused's address to the jury. It is apparent from the
transcript that the accused was an active
and engaged participant in the
process. She presented as highly intelligent, articulate and
the jury verdict, his Honour Judge Gething told the accused that he
intended to sentence her on Friday of that week, being
Friday, 7 June
2024. The transcript reveals that the accused requested 'an extra couple of
days' to remain on bail pending sentence.
The State opposed bail.
accused told his Honour the
I haven't never come to court or - - or disobeyed the bail conditions et cetera.
I don't believe I am any risk of escaping from -
from Perth and, in those
circumstances, I'd ask for just an extra couple of days to get our affairs in
order for that - for that
hearing from the State, his Honour Judge Gething granted the accused bail
until the next day. His Honour, relevantly,
GETHING DCJ:
Okay. Mrs Frigger, this is what I'm going to do.
I'm going to sentence on Friday. I'm going to grant you bail
overnight. I'm going
to bring you back in at 10 o'clock tomorrow
morning. When you're back in at 10 o'clock tomorrow morning, I'm
going to make a suite
of orders. I want you to surrender your passport - I
want you to surrender all passports, and I'm going to make some flight risk
The evidence and materials before me suggest that there's some
assets - or there's some connections overseas. As I said in
Mr Cvetkoski's position is quite correct, that that's the
usual order, and it's not one that it's a sort of exception for that, but
prepared to give you that exception but till Friday.
So the current bail conditions - you'll have to re-sign your bail.
I'll increase the bail. So the bail amount is $50,000, the surety
amount is $50,000. The surety to be provided by Helmut Hubert Josef
Frigger. To reside at [an address]. To remain at that address
overnight, and not leave save for emergencies.
Now, I'm not going to make you surrender your passport tonight, because I
don't want you in prison overnight just because you haven't
surrendered your
passport. So I'm going to adjourn the matter to 9 o'clock -
10 o'clock tomorrow morning. You can expect at that
time I'll make an
order requiring you to surrender your passport, so you need to bring all your
passports with you, any European
ones and also your - any current
Australian passport. And I'll also make orders in relation to approaching
GETHING DCJ:
Yes. Okay. So, The accused, I'm granting you
bail; personal bail $50,000, surety $50,000. To reside at [an address], to
at that address overnight, and not leave save for emergency. You
need to be back in the court precinct by 9.30 tomorrow morning,
in to the custody centre.
the court rose, Judge Gething's Associate Ewan Christie prepared the
bail papers to facilitate the accused's release.
Mr Christie,
who qualified as a lawyer in June 2024, had worked as the usher to his
Honour between December 2023 and April 2024.
He began working as
his Honour's Associate in
April 2024.
He was present at all times during the accused's trial to the best of his
recollection. Mr Christie recalled being notified the
day after the trial
that the accused had left the
Mr Christie
recalled signing the accused's bail
Mr Christie's evidence was that, as the Associate, he would pay attention
to the conditions of bail that the judge was reading out.
He would record
those into the system using a computer. He said there are a number of
pre-populated sections which are filled as
a result of entering that
information. He explained that there is then paperwork, which you print out and
complete. He said that
it made sense to complete the surety paperwork first,
because the bail undertaking relies on the surety being satisfactory and
He completed the surety paperwork (the surety being the
accused's husband, Mr Frigger) first.
approving Mr Frigger as surety, he sat down with the accused to complete
Mr Christie
identified the notice to the surety and identified the conditions entered on the
bail undertaking read out by Gething
DCJ in court. Mr Christie
entered the date that the accused was required to return to court, namely
Mr Christie
explained that the time for attendance on the surety and bail undertaking
differed from the time that his Honour had
ordered the accused to attend because
the system generates a time 45 minutes before the court hearing. In this
instance Mr Christie
had entered 10.00 am as the time for the court
hearing which registers as 9.15 am on the bail paperwork as generated by
the system.
Mr Christie
signed the page as the surety approval officer, designating his position as
accused has sought to make something of the fact that Mr Christie had
described himself as both the clerk of arraigns and the
associate. Nothing
turns on this. The term 'clerk of arraigns' interchange with the term
'associate':
Criminal Procedure Rules 2005
Mr Christie
identified the address and telephone number for Mr Frigger on the surety
undertaking which was the same address and telephone
number appearing in
documentation produced by Australian Border
Mr Frigger's
signature on the surety undertaking appears to have been signed on 4 May
2024. However, Mr Christie said that this
was an error as the date was in
fact 4 June 2024. Mr Frigger signed in his presence and
Mr Christie approved him as
accused was present when Mr Frigger signed the surety papers with
Mr Christie. Mr Christie recalled Mr Frigger saying 'this
injustice' in the presence of the accused. Mr Christie also recalled
Mr Frigger saying to him that he (Mr Christie) 'would
not look at him
(Mr Frigger) in the eyes' when he was speaking to him and the accused
telling Mr Frigger to 'calm
bail undertaking which the accused signed before Mr Christie relevantly
included the place, date, and time for appearance as
the District Court
Perth on Wednesday, 5 June 2024 at 9.15 am. It also included the
following condition:
[P]ersonal undertaking in the amount of $50. 000; surety in the amount of $50,
000 to be provided by Harmut [sic] Hubert Josef Frigger;
The accused is to
reside at [an address];
The accused is to remain at the address overnight and
not leave save for an emergency.
(emphasis added)
the undertaking
appear at the District Court at 9.15 am on Wednesday, 5 June
2024. And to comply with the conditions set out above.
if I am notified by a judicial officer or a court official of a different
time or a different time and place for my appearance,
I will appear at the
time or at the time and place so notified
if I fail to appear in court as required, I will, as soon as is practicable,
appear at the court when it is sitting.
(emphasis added)
the accused signed the bail undertaking, Mr Christie provided her with a
copy of the undertaking. The document contained other
information, including
the accused's details, charges, matter number, and date and time for her to
Mr Christie
witnessed the accused sign the undertaking and signed the document himself.
Relevantly, the document contained a section
which acknowledges that
Mr Christie signed the undertaking and gave a copy of the bail undertaking
to the accused. The document
I acknowledge that I have been given a copy of the bail undertaking and the form
notice to accused attached to or on the reverse
of the copy the above
undertaking was entered into by the accused before me after I had been
informed by him that he had read the
undertaking / read the undertaking to him /
had the undertaking translated to him.
the accused signed the bail undertaking she was released from the custody of the
The accused's bail undertaking
note that the conditions I have referred to are standard conditions in a bail
undertaking. Those standards conditions appear in
of bail undertaking and when required
undertaking is an undertaking in writing by an accused in the prescribed form -
(a) that the accused will appear at a time and place specified, or deemed
section 31(3)
to be specified, in the undertaking; and
(b) that if the accused fails to appear at that time and place the accused
will, as soon as is practicable, appear at the court at
which the accused was
required to appear, when that court is sitting;
The accused's challenge to Mr Christie's evidence
accused cross-examined Mr Christie extensively, challenging his account of
the circumstances in which the surety and bail papers
were prepared.
Mr Christie
agreed that what Judge Gething had said about the time for appearance (ie:
10 am) and what was in the bail undertaking
(ie: 9.15 am) were
Mr Christie
denied that he had made a false statement when he said that he had 'sat down'
with the accused and completed the bail
undertaking with her. Under
cross-examination, Mr Christie said that he completed the paperwork at the
bar table and not in the
dock, as the accused had
Mr Christie
denied that he did not tell the accused there was a difference in the time
between what Judge Gething had said was the
time for appearance and what
was in the bail
undertaking.
Mr Christie said that he had pointed out the words in bold in the
undertaking and reminded her that she needed to be at
the District
Court building at 9.15 am on 5 June
in bold are the stated the time and place namely 5 June 2024 at
Mr Christie's
evidence was that the accused had 'intimated' that she understood the terms of
the bail undertaking. Mr Christie said
that he gave the accused the
opportunity to read the bail undertaking and asked her if she had any other
questions but she did not.
Having been in court at the time that
his Honour had read her the bail conditions, together with the fact that
the accused had no
other questions of him, Mr Christie formed the view that
the accused had understood the bail undertaking. Mr Christie further said
that, when she went on to sign the undertaking, that 'gave him confidence'
that she had read the bail
undertaking.
The accused's conduct after her release from bail
after 3.16 am the next morning, 5 June 2024, CCTV footage
produced by the witness, Jayson Allan Haines, a security operation
specialist at
Perth Airport,
shows the accused arriving at the international airport in car registration
number *****19.
The vehicle was, according to the Department of Transport, registered to the
State also tendered a still photograph of the video showing an image of the car
and two people who the State says are Mr Frigger
accused had objected to the CCTV evidence, asserting it had been illegally
obtained. The witness Jayson Haines was responsible
for the use and
monitoring of Perth Airport closed circuit television (CCTV) and dealing
with any requests to view
CCTV footage.
He was authorised to disclose CCTV footage to police. Before he
became an authorised person, he had undergone training with the
Perth Airport legal team. This included training as to the 'terms and
conditions' under which CCTV could be released, having regard
to the provisions
12 June 2024, Mr Haines received a formal request to view
CCTV footage from Western Australia
Mr Haines signed the document as an authorised person, executed on behalf
of Perth Airport. He then met with the officer who made
produced a Release of Records form signed by him on 12 June 2024 and
Western Australia Police Cadet Joshua Lake on 14 June 2024.
Mr Haines met with Western Australia Police Cadet Joshua Lake on
14 June 2024.
uploaded the CCTV to a disc and handed it to the officer on the release form,
keeping the original copy. For the reasons
which appear in my ruling earlier in
these proceedings,
the evidence was not illegally obtained.
movement records produced by Michael Spencer,
the Acting Inspector of Australian Border Force, revealed that
the accused
had departed on flight SQ224 to Singapore and did not return to
Australia until 23 July
recalled receiving two requests relevant to the present proceedings. The first
was in relation to an incoming passenger
card and one was a request for movement
records. He understood that the request related to an Angela Reid (a known
alias for the
gave evidence that there were two separate requests in relation to the passenger
card for Angela Reid and a request in
relation to her movement
authorised the release of the passenger movement records. He signed a 'Release
of Records' form which stated that the
Records 'can be used by the Recipient
Party for the following purposes only: For Investigation and Prosecution
response to lawful requests from the WA Police, Mr Spencer produced
passenger movement records for Angela Cecilia Theresa Reid,
date of birth
28 April 1953, with her country of birth recorded as India and a person ID
reference number ******74. These records
show that the accused departed Perth
Singapore Airways flight SQ 224 and arrived back in Perth on
in response to a lawful request from WA Police, Mr Spencer produced an
image of a passenger card, being a document which
every passenger coming into
Australia must complete. The passenger cards are filled out in
handwriting.
Mr Spencer produced a passenger card signed by Angela Cecilia Theresa
Reid. The passenger card included an emergency contact as
Hartmut Frigger and a mobile number matching the mobile number supplied in
the surety undertaking that Mr Frigger himself had
witness, Elise Rachel James, a senior investigator at the Department of
Foreign Affairs and Trade produced copies of a passport
application in the
name of Angela Cecilia Theresa Reid. She gave this to WA Police
pursuant to a lawful
Ms James confirmed that the person, Angela Cecilia Theresa Reid was
the same person as the accused according to records held by
Passports Office.
accused had objected to the evidence of personal information revealed in the
passenger movement records, the passenger card and
her passport documents on the
basis that it was illegally obtained and in breach of, inter alia, the
Migration Act
Australian Border Force Act
. I was satisfied that the evidence was not illegally
obtained for the reasons which appear at in my earlier
Proceedings before Gething DCJ on 5 June 2024
in the morning of 5 June 2024, Mr Christie was advised by an agency
(the name of which he could not recall) that the accused
had, since being
released to bail, boarded a plane to Singapore with her final destination
unknown. He said that a security officer
at the court told him that the accused
had not surrendered to
records show that his Honour Judge Gething convened the court shortly after
10.00 am. The accused was not present when
His Honour then issued a warrant for her arrest and later issued a
certificate for her failure to appear under
Mr Christie
said that he prepared the arrest warrant and emailed a copy to the
Western Australia
The accused's next contact with the court
Mrs Frigger
attempted to file a Notice of Acting on behalf of solicitors in Europe.
However, his Honour Judge Gething ordered that
service could not be
accepted, as the accused was in breach of her bail undertaking. His Honour
published a decision recording his
The accused is arrested on 23 July 2024
accused flew back to Perth on 23 July 2024. That day, officers from
Belmont Police, including Constable Liam Pratt, went to
Perth Airport to execute the arrest warrant. Mrs Frigger was placed
under arrest.
Constable Pratt identified Mrs Frigger's image from a photograph
taken at Perth Airport at the time of her
He confirmed that the warrant was executed at
The accused is charged and served with the prosecution notice
Nicholas Berragan was the investigating officer. He conducted a number of
investigations in relation to Mrs Frigger's whereabouts
following her
failure to appear on 5 June 2024 and served her with a prosecution
Conclusions on the elements
Element one - identity
there has been no formal admission, identity is not seriously in issue.
accused has not suggested that she is not the person named in the prosecution
notice or that she did not engage in the conduct
alleged by the
prosecution.
evidence unequivocally establishes that Mrs Frigger is the person named in
the prosecution notice and that she is the person
who failed to appear in answer
to her bail undertaking. Evidence of identity is established beyond reasonable
doubt by the following
when Mrs Frigger appeared before Judge Gething on 4 June 2024,
she acknowledged that she was Angela Cecilia Theresa
she signed a bail undertaking before Mr Christie in the name
Angela Cecilia Theresa
the CCTV footage and the accompanying still
the airport shows a woman fitting her description arriving in a silver Camry
registration number **** *19. The Department of
Transport Certificate
of Evidence shows this to be registered in the name of Angela Cecilia
Theresa Frigger at an address matching
the address on her bail
undertaking.
on the same day she arrived at the international airport, passenger movement
records for Angela Cecilia T Reid, date of
birth 28 April 1953, with
the 'person ID' number ****84, established a person with that identity
departed Perth Airport on 5 June
2024. The evidence of
Ms James was that Angela Cecilia T. Reid, with those identifying
features, is the
the passenger card for her re-entry to Australia on 23 July 2024 is signed
in the name of Angela Reid. The passenger card
contains the name of
Mrs Frigger's husband, Hartmut Frigger, as her emergency contact and
contains an address matching the address
on her bail
undertaking.
when arrested by Constable Pratt at Perth Airport on 23 July
2024, she did not dispute her
the evidence of Ms James was that her passport renewal application was made
in the name of Angela Cecilia Theresa Reid
on 10 September 2019. The
application contains a photograph which matches the accused's appearance and
specifies her home address
as the same address on her bail
undertaking.
Element two - signed a bail undertaking
second element is that the accused must have signed a bail undertaking. The
evidence of Mr Christie is that Mrs Frigger signed
undertaking
this is not challenged.
accept the evidence of Mr Christie that the accused signed the bail
undertaking, and I am satisfied that the State has proven this
element beyond
reasonable doubt.
Element three – failed to comply with a condition of the bail
undertaking
third element is that the State must prove beyond reasonable doubt that the
accused failed to comply with the condition of the
bail undertaking.
Mrs Frigger submitted that the evidence did not establish that
Mr Christie had complied with his obligations under
which provides as follows:
of person before whom bail undertaking is entered
(1) The person before whom a bail undertaking is
to be entered into by an accused shall before it is entered
(a) either -
(i) read it to the accused; or
(ii) be informed by the accused that the accused has read it; or
(iii) if necessary, have it translated to the accused;
(b) ensure that all conditions which are to be complied with before the
release of the accused have been complied with.
Did Mr Christie's alleged failure to comply with
invalidate the undertaking?
am satisfied, on the basis of Mr Christie's evidence, that he was informed
by the accused that she had read the bail undertaking:
Mr Christie had
drawn her attention to the conditions in bold prior to her signing it.
accused has submitted that Mr Christie did not give an unequivocal account
of having read the undertaking, or informing her that
she had read the
undertaking. I reject that submission.
Mr Christie's
evidence was that the accused had informed him, by words and conduct, that
she had been informed about the bail conditions.
His evidence was that she was
present when his Honour Judge Gething explained the terms of bail to
Mr Christie's
evidence was that she had intimated that she had understood the
conditions.
Difference between the time stated for attendance by Gething DCJ and the
time for attendance in the bail undertaking is immaterial
bail undertaking signed by the accused purported to require her attendance at
9.15 am on 5 June 2024. His Honour Judge Gething,
had notified
the accused orally that the time for her appearance was 10.00 am on
5 June 2024.
the discrepancy between the time stated by Judge Gething and the time
stated on the bail undertaking significant to the accused's
assertion that the
bail undertaking was invalid? In my view, nothing turns on this. That is
simply requires that a person
shall not be released on bail for an appearance in court unless they have first
entered into a bail
undertaking, or they are deemed to have done so under
Sections 31(1)
relevantly provide:
time and place for appearance, substituting
different time or a different time and place may be substituted in accordance
with this section for the time and place for appearance
specified, or
deemed by this section to be specified, in a bail undertaking.
(2) A different time, or a different time and place, for the appearance by
the accused may be substituted as mentioned in
(a) upon an adjournment of proceedings at which the accused is present, by
the judicial officer, if he has power to grant bail for
that appearance, fixing
a time and place for the resumed proceedings and notifying the accused
orally thereof;
(3) Where a different time or a different time and place is notified to an
accused pursuant to subsection (2) the bail undertaking
shall be deemed to
be amended to specify that time or that time and place for appearance, and the
terms and conditions thereof shall
continue to apply as so amended as
if the accused had entered into the bail undertaking in that form.
critical fact is that the accused had signed a bail undertaking in the
prescribed form. The time and the place specified in
the undertaking, that is
9.15 am, is deemed to be 10 am by the operation of
is immaterial, as the accused submits, that the State has 'failed' to prove she
was not present at 9.15 am, because the matter
was not called on at that
time. The evidence establishes that she could not have attended at that time,
because she had fled the
country. She could not have attended then or at any
other time as soon as reasonably practicable thereafter.
was not complied with the bail undertaking was not 'void'
accused's submission that Mr Christie did not strictly comply with
contains a logical fallacy. If the accused's submission that the bail
undertaking was 'invalid', and therefore, as she put it,
ab initio' she could not have been released on bail in the first
place. That could not have been the intended effect of
accused submitted that, as there was no condition of her bail preventing
international travel, the evidence concerning her going
to the airport and
leaving Australia was not admissible. That submission has no merit. The
relevant condition is the requirement
to attend court on 5 June 2024.
terms of Judge Gething's orders, as reflected in the bail, undertaking
plainly prevented her from going to the airport. The
terms of bail required her
to stay at home overnight and not leave, except in an emergency. There was no
evidence of such an emergency.
am therefore satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the accused 'failed to
comply' with a condition of her undertaking.
Element four – without reasonable cause
fourth and final element is that the State must prove beyond reasonable doubt
that the accused had no reasonable cause for her
failure to comply with the
undertaking. There is no direct evidence of the presence of or absence of
reasonable cause, other than
the accused's non-attendance. The relevant
question is whether, on the basis of the evidence adduced by the State, the
establishes beyond reasonable doubt the absence of reasonable cause.
The following is relevant to the issue of reasonable cause.
transcript of proceedings on 4 June 2024 and the corresponding records
reveals that the accused engaged articulately and intelligently
with his Honour
Judge Gething and the jury on the last day of her trial, including at the
time his Honour was making orders for her
release to bail. The accused
could not have misunderstood her obligation to appear in court the next
Mr Christie's evidence was that he had explained to the accused her
obligation to attend court the next day when she signed
the undertaking;
and she had intimated to him that she understood that obligation.
accused's conduct in travelling to the international airport and boarding an
international flight was a rational decision. The
CCTV footage shows
her demeanour to be calm and purposeful. She exhibited no signs of being under
the evidence adduced, there is no rational basis for inferring that the accused
had a reasonable cause for her failure to attend
court on 5 June 2024.
some circumstances where there had been a failure of the person before whom a
bail undertaking is entered to comply with
it may be possible to establish reasonable cause. However, in my view, that
could only occur if the failure to comply with
led to the bailee
misunderstanding the conditions of the bail undertaking.
example which springs to mind would be the case of an accused of low
intelligence or with communication difficulties or who was
unfamiliar with the
court process. The accused is not the kind of person I have just described.
is important to observe that the accused told his Honour Judge Gething on
4 June 2024 that she was not a 'flight risk'. This
she was conscious that she should not leave the country. She had prepared
grounds for appeal and intended to apply for
bail pending appeal. This leads me
to conclude that she could not have mistaken her obligation to present at court.
The irresistible
conclusion is that the accused was aware she was likely to be
remanded in custody and wished to avoid that prospect.
accused submitted that she had a reasonable cause for her non-attendance, namely
her distress at being convicted and her need
to ensure that she was able to
prepare an appeal. There has been no evidence to that effect. I very much
doubt that this would,
in any event, be a proper basis for establishing
reasonable cause.
accused had intended to adduce evidence from a clinical psychologist
concerning her mental state at the relevant time. However,
that I ruled that
the evidence was not admissible for reasons which appear in the
transcript.
State has proved beyond reasonable doubt that the accused failed to appear in
breach of her undertaking and that she did so without
reasonable cause.
find the charge proven to the requisite standard. I find the accused guilty and
I enter a judgment of conviction.
I certify that the preceding paragraph(s)
comprise the reasons for decision of the District Court of Western
14 NOVEMBER 2025
Exhibit 1.1 and Exhibit 1.2, transcript of trial before Gething DCJ on
4 June 2024 and evidentiary certificate,
Evidence Act 1906
22, Prosecution Notice dated 23 July
3060 - ts 3098 (Accused submissions); ts 3099 - ts 3108 (State submissions); ts
3108 - ts 3111 (Judge's ruling).
ts 3113 - ts
3115 (Judge's
1.1 and Exhibit
Record of proceedings before Gething DCJ following jury
(Transcript of trial on Indictment number 1112 of 2019).
example, ts 2337 - ts 2357, ts 2397 - ts
Exhibit 3, Notice to Surety as to terms of bail for Harmut Frigger; Exhibit
4, Notice to Surety as to terms of
- ts 2714; Exhibit 3, Surety notice; Exhibit 4, Notice to surety as to terms of
5, Form 6 Bail
Undertaking.
Exhibit 5, Form 6 Bail
Undertaking.
12, Video footage from
Perth Airport.
Exhibit 12 and Exhibit 12.2. This car is registered to the accused, Exhibit 18,
Photograph at
Perth Airport.
Exhibit 19, Certificate of Evidence from Department of
Exhibit 12.1, Still image of video of CCTV footage of Perth Airport, ts
2777; Exhibit 12.1, Still image of the video of CCTV footage
of Perth Airport
showing silver vehicle, registration
2773; Exhibit 11, The Perth Airport release of records form signed by
ts 2776; Exhibit 11, The Perth Airport release of records form signed by Mr
14 and Exhibit 15, Movement Record for Angela Frigger, Passenger
11, Release of Records
Exhibit 14.1 and Exhibit 14.2, Movement records for Angela Reid (aka
Frigger) and movement records
15, Passenger
- ts 3040; ts 3048; Exhibit 23, Request for
Disclosure.
3033; Exhibit 20, Documents relating to Australian Passport Renewal
Application.
Exhibit 6.1, Recording of proceedings before Gething DCJ; transcript of
proceedings before Gething DCJ on 5 June 2024; Exhibit 6.3,
Certificate granted under
Evidence Act
8, Certificate
issued 5 June
Exhibit 7, Arrest warrant of Mrs Frigger; Exhibit 8, Certificate under
The State of Western Australia v Frigger
[2024] WADC
Arrest Warrant of Mrs Frigger and Exhibit 10, Executed Arrest Warrant,
Prosecution notice PE 1049 of
5, Form 6 Bail
Undertaking.
Exhibit 12.1 and Exhibit
19, Certificate of evidence from Department of
15, Passenger
20, 5 pages of documents relating to Australian Passport Renewal
Application.
3113 - ts 3115.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (414 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter