URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WAIRC/2025/132.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:04:11
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Reuben Molinari -v- Director General, Department of Biodiversity, Conservation and Attractions [2025] WAIRC 132; (28 February 2025)
UNFAIR DISMISSAL
APPLICATION
WESTERN AUSTRALIAN INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COMMISSION
COMMISSIONER C TSANG
ON THE PAPERS
DELIVERED :
28 FEBRUARY 2025
U 77 OF 2024
REUBEN MOLINARI
DIRECTOR GENERAL, DEPARTMENT OF
BIODIVERSITY, CONSERVATION AND ATTRACTIONS
Application
to amend Form 2 - Unfair Dismissal Application
Legislation
Industrial Relations Act 1979
Application to amend
Representation:
Mr D Rafferty of counsel
Mr J Carroll of counsel
Case referred to in reasons:
Malik v Paul Albert, Director General, Department of Education of Western
[2004] WASCA 51
Reasons for Decision
19 August 2024, the applicant filed a
Form 2 – Unfair Dismissal
Application
29 August 2024, the respondent filed a
Form 2A – Employer Response
to Unfair Dismissal Application
matter was listed for conciliation on 26 November 2024 and subsequently
another conciliation was held on 11 February 2025.
11 February 2025, the following directions were issued:
February 2025, the applicant to file an application seeking leave to amend the
filed on 19 August 2024 (
Application to Amend
(b) By 28 February 2025, the respondent to file their response to the
Application to Amend.
(c) Unless the Commission determines otherwise, the Application to Amend will
be determined on the papers.
Applicant’s Application to Amend
accordance with the direction at [
(a)] above, the applicant filed their
Application to Amend, seeking leave to file an amended Form 2 on the terms
as attached to the
application (
amended claim
Leave should be granted by reason of:
positions that the Commission, applicant and respondent took at the conference
in relation to the amendment of the application;
amendments are made early in the proceeding and unlikely to cause any prejudice
to the respondent;
amendments are consistent with the purpose and effect of
ss 26(1)(a)
(1)(l) and (v) of the Act.
Respondent’s response
to the direction at [
(b)] above, the
respondent filed their response, stating:
Introduction
Form 1A application, the applicant applies to amend his claim.
respondent opposes leave being granted to amend for the following reasons taken
individually and together:
(a) First, no reasons have been
given to explain why there is a need to amend or why the application in its
original form is not in
a form that the applicant presses.
(b) Secondly, the applicant impermissibly relies upon confidential
communications from conference to support the application to amend.
(c) Thirdly, contrary to the applicant’s assertion, the respondent is
prejudiced by leave being granted to amend.
(d) Fourthly, the proposed amended claim is impermissibly vague.
(e) Fifthly, the case the applicant seeks to run pursuant to the proposed
amendments is partially inconsistent with the position he
put forward during the
disciplinary process, and it would be contrary to equity and good conscience to
allow the applicant to pursue
his claim in that manner.
reasons explaining why amendment required
to one side what was said in conference (which is dealt with below), the
applicant does not propose to adduce any evidence
explaining why there is a need
to amend the claim or why the claim as it presently stands is not in a form to
proceed to trial.
applicant seeks the indulgence of the Commission. It is for him to establish
that such indulgence should be granted. Amendments
are not merely for the
taking, particularly significant amendments sought to be made after the matter
has been the subject of conciliation
and when the matter would otherwise be
ready to be programmed for trial.
the present case, the applicant was at all times represented by an industrial
organisation which has extensive experience representing
the interests of its
members, including in claims of unfair dismissal.
is not clear (because there is no evidence or proposed evidence) why the claim
in its original form is not the claim the applicant
wishes to press to trial. It
is also not clear (because there is no evidence) why significant amendments are
now sought.
absence of evidence means the applicant has not established any reason, let
alone a good reason, warranting the grant of an indulgence.
is nothing the Commission could point to in order to say it would be acting in
accordance with equity and good conscience in
granting the amendment.
lack of evidence or reasons in support of the amendment when there is prejudice
to the respondent is sufficient in and of itself
for the application to be
Impermissible
reliance on confidential communications
of the reasons given supporting the application to amend is that certain
comments were made by the Commissioner, the applicant,
and the respondent at a
confidential conference held under the
Industrial Relations Act 1979
applicant has not identified any relevant exception to the confidentiality of
that conference in support of his reliance on that
discussion.
is trite that such discussion was confidential and in the absence of a
recognised exception to confidentiality, it is improper,
indeed it is an abuse
of process, for the applicant to seek to rely on what was said in conference in
support of his application.
basis is sufficient to warrant the application being refused. Indeed, it is a
sufficient basis to dismiss the whole proceedings
because the applicant is
attempting to abuse the processes of the Commission by using what was said in
conference for an improper
would be contrary to equity and good conscience for the Commission to grant the
application when the applicant comes with unclean
hands by relying upon
confidential communications which [is] impermissible to rely upon. The
applicant’s approach has the capacity
to cause a chilling effect on
parties being open and frank in conferences before the Commission for fear that
what is said will be
impermissibly used in the future.
applicant asserts there is no prejudice to the respondent. Even if true, that
would simply be a neutral consideration, it would
not be a consideration
positively in support of granting the application.
and in any event, the following prejudice arises:
(a) First, the
respondent has to respond to the present application and will need to draft and
file an amended response in the proceedings
if the application is granted. That
will lead to resources being used and costs being incurred which would otherwise
not have been
incurred and which are not recoverable.
(b) Secondly, the proposed [amended] claim is ambiguous and the respondent
would be prejudiced because he cannot properly understand
or respond to the
proposed amended claim. For example: (i) [1(b)], [2(b)], and [5(b)] say the
“conduct was contextualised”,
but the applicant does not say what
the contextual features of the conduct were; (ii) [1(a)] is ambiguous as there
is no plea with
respect to the balance of the conduct the subject of allegation
2; (iii) [2(a)] is ambiguous there is no reference to the other instruction
applicant was alleged to have been given; and (iv) [4(a)] is ambiguous because
it refers to engaging in conduct “along
the lines of what is
(c) Thirdly, the proposed amended claim reveals the applicant seeks to pursue
these proceedings in a way that is impermissibly inconsistent
with the way he
responded to the allegations – in particular, [4] as well as the
applicant’s written comments on the
allegation letter that a number of
allegations were fabricated. It would be prejudicial to the respondent to allow
the applicant
to run a case which is inconsistent with his responses during the
disciplinary process.
proposed [amended] claim is ambiguous for the reasons provided above and leave
should not be given to amend in the presently proposed
terms because further
amendment would be required to provide procedural fairness to the
respondent.
Inconsistent
least [4] of the proposed amended claim is inconsistent with the
applicant’s response in the course of the disciplinary process
December 2023.
[4], the applicant admits engaging in “certain conduct along the lines of
what is alleged” in respect of the Mental
Health First Aid Course, but in
his 1 December 2023 response to the allegations he denied some of the alleged
conduct the subject
of that allegation.
is contrary to equity and good conscience to allow the applicant to pursue such
an inconsistent case especially where, given the
applicant must have knowledge
of what he did or did not do, either his response to the allegation or his
proposed amended application
must be dishonest.
application to amend should be dismissed.
Consideration
applicant was dismissed on 19 July 2024.
of the Act (as it applied at the time, now
s 29(2)(a))
required the
to have been filed by 16 August 2024, being no ‘later
than 28 days after the day on which the employee’s employment is
terminated’.
of the Act provides that the Commission may accept a Form 2 that has been
filed out of time ‘if the Commission considers that
it would be unfair not
1 of the Schedule to the
The applicant was
employed by the respondent as a Conservation Employee until his dismissal on
19 July 2024. The claim for unfair
dismissal was accepted for filing
outside of the 28-day time limit and the applicant requires an extension of
time. No application
for an extension of time has been filed, and no explanation
for the delay has been provided.
a review of the Registry’s file, it appears that:
Friday, 16 August 2024, 12:30pm, the applicant’s previous representatives
(the AWU), emailed the Commission’s Registry
attaching the
for filing. In this email, the AWU requested the Commission to contact the
AWU’s office during business hours to enable the
filing fee to be paid by
credit card.
(b) A tax invoice for the filing fee was issued on Monday, 19 August 2024,
was accepted for filing on 19 August 2024, 2:29pm.
the circumstances outlined in [
above, there does not appear to be any impediment to the
proceeding to hearing and determination.
to amend the
, the applicant requires the leave of the
Commission.
outlined at [
] above, the applicant
has presented three reasons why they contend the Commission should grant
(a) the positions taken at the conciliation conference
(b) the amendments are made early in the proceeding and unlikely to cause any
prejudice to the respondent (
(c) the amendments are consistent with the purpose and effect of
ss 26(1)(a)
(1)(l) and (v) of the Act (
1 can be promptly addressed by stating that I agree with the respondent’s
submission at [12] of their response. Conciliation
conferences are private
and confidential, and conducted on a without prejudice basis. The purpose of
this is to enable parties to
explore potential settlement options without the
concern of any offers or concessions made during the conference being used
them if the matter proceeds. Consequently, I agree with the
respondent’s contention that it is impermissible for the applicant
on Reason 1.
2 concerns the prejudice to the respondent.
the Industrial Appeal Court decision of
Malik v Paul Albert, Director
General, Department of Education of Western Australia
) [26], Steytler J (Presiding Judge) provided
the following comments in relation to when it would be unfair not to accept an
dismissal claim submitted out of time:
Like E M Heenan J, I
consider that the principles enunciated by Marshall J in
Brodie-Hanns v
MTV Publishing Ltd
(1995) 67 IR 298
are apposite. As E M Heenan J has
said, Marshall J there identified the following six “principles” (at
“1. Special circumstances are not necessary but the Court must be
positively satisfied that the prescribed period should be
extended. The prima
facie position is that the time limit should be complied with unless there is an
acceptable explanation of the
delay which makes it equitable to so extend.
taken by the applicant to contest the termination, other than applying under the
Act will be relevant. It will show that the
decision to terminate is actively
contested. It may favour the granting of an extension of time.
to the respondent including prejudice caused by delay will go against the
granting of an extension of time.
mere absence of prejudice to the respondent is an insufficient basis to grant an
extension of time.
merits of the substantive application may be taken into account in determining
whether to grant an extension of time.
Consideration
of fairness as between the applicant and other persons in a like position are
relevant to the exercise of the Court’s
discretion.”
dealt with the principles relevant to an application under
of the Act, I consider that principles 3 and 4 are apropos to the
Application to Amend.
particular, the lack of prejudice to the respondent would not be a sufficient
reason to grant the Application to Amend. Conversely,
the presence of prejudice
to the respondent would be a relevant factor to consider in denying the
Application to Amend.
response to Reason 2, the respondent has detailed the prejudice they claim would
result from the Application to Amend being granted
at [16] of their
readily accept the prejudice at [16(a)] of the respondent’s response.
relation to the prejudice mentioned at [16(b)] of the respondent’s
response, I accept that [1(b)], [2(b)], and [5(b)] of
the amended claim that the
“conduct was contextualised” without specifying the contextual
aspects, and [4(a)] of the
amended claim of engaging in conduct “along the
lines of what is alleged”, are ambiguous, and may prevent the respondent
from understanding the case to be answered and thus restrict the respondent from
responding to the amended claim without first seeking
further particulars.
also accept that, without specifying the conduct the subject of allegations 2
and 3 that is said to be “contextualised”
at [1(b)] and [(2(b)] of
the amended claim, that [1(a)] of the amended claim in not addressing the
entirety of the conduct, and [2(a)]
in not mentioning the other instruction the
applicant was given, are ambiguous.
regard to the prejudice mentioned at [16(c)] of the respondent’s response,
I accept that the amended claim implies the
applicant is attempting to
pursue the proceedings in a way that seems inconsistent with his response to the
allegations, especially
in instances where he claimed that several of the
allegations were fabricated.
I am not fully persuaded by the purported prejudice resulting from the
inconsistency at [4] of the amended claim. An assessment
of the allegation
vis-à-vis the applicant’s response submitted on 1 December 2023
with [4] of the amended claim suggests
the applicant is consistent in admitting
to engaging in some of the conduct alleged and denying engaging in some of the
conduct alleged.
ss 26(1)(a)
(1)(l) and (v) of the Act. These state:
to act according to equity and good conscience
the exercise of its jurisdiction under this Act the Commission –
(a) must act according to equity, good conscience, and the substantial merits
of the case without regard to technicalities or legal
of the Commission
(1) Except as otherwise provided in this Act,
the Commission may, in relation to any matter before it –
(l) allow the amendment of any proceedings on such terms as it sees fit;
(v) generally give all such directions and do all such things as are
necessary or expedient for the expedition and just hearing and
determination of
the matter.
difficulty with Reason 3 is that while the Commission may allow an amendment
pursuant to
of the Act, the applicant has not provided any evidence
the Commission should exercise this discretion. Nor
has the applicant provided any evidence as to
the amendment would be consistent with
ss 26(1)(a)
(1)(v) of the Act.
accept the respondent’s submissions at [3]–[9] of their response,
that the applicant is seeking for the Commission to
exercise its discretion in
granting the Application to Amend. However, despite the onus being on
the applicant to demonstrate that
leave should be granted, the applicant has not
presented any evidence to support the Application to
the preceding reasons, I am not persuaded that the applicant has demonstrated
that I should exercise my discretion to grant leave
for him to amend the Form
Consequently,
the Application to Amend will be dismissed.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (118 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter