URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WASC/2025/460.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:07:52
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
ATTORNEY GENERAL -v- DAMD by his guardian ad litem the PUBLIC ADVOCATE [2025] WASC 460 (5 November 2025)
COURT OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
GENERAL -v- DAMD by his guardian ad litem the PUBLIC ADVOCATE
[2025] WASC
OCTOBER 2025
DELIVERED :
NOVEMBER 2025
CLMI 5 of 2024
by his guardian ad litem the PUBLIC ADVOCATE
Law (Mental Impairment) Act 2003
Respondent subject to a limiting term which had expired - Application for an
extended custody order - Turns on own facts
Legislation:
Criminal Law
(Mental Impairment) Act 2023
custody order made for a period of 2
Representation:
Ms K Gorski
Solicitors:
State Solicitor's
Legal Aid - Perth - Criminal
Law Division
referred to in decision(s):
Introduction
application filed 10 December 2024, the Attorney General for Western
Australia (
) has applied for
an extended custody order (
relation to the
(whose name
has been anonymised pursuant to a suppression order).
1993, the Respondent was charged on indictment with 10 offences, the most
serious of which were three charges of attempting to
unlawfully kill a person
pursuant to
Criminal Code
) s 283(1).
The Respondent was tried before Walsh J and a jury in the Supreme Court
sitting in Broome. On 12 April 1995, following
a three‑day trial, he
was found not guilty of eight counts on the indictment on the grounds of
unsoundness of mind (it was
not necessary for the jury to deliver verdicts on
the remaining two counts as they were pleaded as statutory alternatives)
Index Offending
). The effect of the
jury's verdicts was that, while they were satisfied beyond reasonable doubt as
to the elements of each offence,
they were also satisfied that the Respondent
was not criminally responsible for the acts constituting those offences by
his mental disease or natural mental infirmity. Walsh J ordered
that the Respondent be kept in strict custody subject to the Governor's
pursuant to CC
the commencement of the
Criminal Law
(Mentally Impaired Accused) Act 1996
Repealed Act
), the Respondent became a
'mentally impaired defendant' within the meaning of pt 5 of the Repealed
Act and subject to a custody order
under that Act.
Repealed Act was, in turn, repealed by the
Criminal Law (Mental Impairment) Act 2023
), which commenced
operation on 1 September 2024. The transitional provisions in CLMI Act
pt 14 provided that a custody order under
the Repealed Act in effect
immediately before the commencement day, had the effect as if it were a custody
order made under
The CLMI Act then required the Director of Public Prosecutions to apply to the
Court under CLMI s 261 for a limiting term to be set
in respect of the
Respondent's then existing custody order. On 21 October 2024,
McGrath J set the limiting term at 11 years.
the limiting term expired prior to the date on which it was set, by CLMI Act
s 265(2) the existing custody order continues to
operate until an order is
made under CLMI Act s 265(6). That subsection provides that the Supreme
Court must:
(a) make an order discharging the person from the existing custody order; or
(b) make an order under pt 7 div 5 (which deals with
the reasons which follow, the appropriate order in respect of the Respondent is
an ECO of two years' duration.
the hearing on 22 October 2025, counsel for the Applicant tendered a Book
of Materials (
) pursuant to CLMI Act
s 123(4). Counsel also tendered a copy of the Respondent's current
National Disability Insurance Scheme
) plan dated 9 October
Applicant also adduced oral evidence from:
(a) Emily Secker, a Senior Community Corrections Officer
) from Adult Community Corrections
) responsible for supervising the
Respondent, and the author of a Review Report to the Mental Impairment Review
29 August 2025 (
2025 Tribunal
(b) Nicola Lloyd, a SCCO and the author of the ACC 'Extended Order Assessment'
report dated 13 August 2025
2025 ACC Report
(c) Dr Edward Petch, a psychiatrist, being the author of the report prepared
pursuant to CLMI Act s 106(3), dated 29 July 2025
Respondent attended the hearing with the assistance of a Communication Partner
appointed pursuant to CLMI Act s 21. He did not
give or adduce
Applicant relied on written submissions filed 16 October 2025
Applicant's Submissions
Respondent relied on written submissions filed 10 October 2025
Respondent's
Submissions
Legal principles
objects of the CLMI Act are set out in s 7(1) in the following
(1) The objects of this Act are as follows —
(a) to ensure the protection of the community;
(b) to ensure persons with mental impairment who are charged with an
(i) are identified early in their contact with the justice system; and
(ii) are given a reasonable opportunity to become fit to stand trial; and
(iii) are given a fair hearing even if they are unfit to stand trial in
accordance with ordinary procedures; and
(iv) are not found to have committed the offence unless, on the evidence
available, it can be proved to the ordinary criminal standard
of proof that the
person committed the offence; and
(v) are subject to the least possible interference with their rights and
(c) to ensure that persons who are subject to supervision orders —
(i) are afforded procedural fairness in relation to the administration and
management of those orders; and
(ii) are reintegrated into the community in a safe
performing functions under the CLMI Act, by s 7(2) the court must have
regard to the following principles (so far as are
(a) that persons with mental impairment should be subject to the least possible
restriction on their freedom consistent with the
protection of the
(b) that persons with mental impairment in the justice system should have access
to advocacy services;
(c) that persons with mental impairment in the justice system should be provided
with the best possible treatment, care and support;
(d) that persons with mental impairment in the justice system should be dealt
with in a manner that is culturally appropriate;
(e) that persons with mental impairment in the justice system should not be
subject to outcomes under this Act that restrict their
freedom more severely
than if they had been convicted of the offence that they have been found to
have, or are alleged to have, committed;
(k) that victims of offences committed by persons with mental impairment should
have the opportunity to be acknowledged and heard;
(l) that the role of carers and families in the treatment, care and support of
persons with mental impairment should be
recognised.
Act s 8 then provides that the paramount consideration for the court to
consider when performing its functions is the protection
of the community.
Act pt 7 provides for the making of ECOs and Community Supervision Orders
). Proceedings under this part are
proceedings.
Act s 103 provides that the Tribunal must consider the need for an ECO in
respect of supervised persons, which relevantly includes
a person subject to a
custody order. The Tribunal must, as soon as practicable, report to
the Minister on the need for an ECO in
respect of the
In such a report, the Tribunal must recommend that the Minister apply for an ECO
if it is satisfied that it is necessary to ensure
the adequate protection of the
community against an unacceptable risk that the person will commit a serious
Following receipt of the Tribunal's report under CLMI Act s 103, and having
regard to it, the Minister may apply to the Supreme Court
for an ECO under
s 105(1) in respect of the supervised person.
an application is made for an extended order in respect of a supervised person,
then by CLMI Act s 106(1)(a) the court must order
that the person be
examined by a psychiatrist, psychologist or other appropriate expert and that a
report be prepared and submitted
to the court. Orders to this effect were made
by the Chief Justice on 28 January 2025, along with related programming
ECO 'is an order that, subject to this Act, a supervised person be detained in
custody at a place determined from time to time
by the Tribunal under pt 6
div 3 for the protection of the
community'.
power of the Supreme Court to make an ECO is found in CLMI Act s 110(1).
It is to be made for a term set by the court. The
test to be applied is
contained in CLMI Act s 110(3):
Before making an extended custody order, the court must be satisfied, by
acceptable and cogent evidence and to a high degree of probability,
ensure the adequate protection of the community against an unacceptable risk
that the supervised person will commit a serious
offence, it is necessary to
make an extended custody order in respect of the supervised person.
'serious offence' means an offence listed in CLMI Act Schedule 1.
the court is not satisfied as to the matter in CLMI Act s 110(3), it may
make a CSO in respect of the supervised
If the court does not make an ECO or a CSO in respect of the supervised person,
it must make an order discharging the person from
their existing custody
test in CLMI Act s 110(3) is similar, but not identical, to the test
contained in
High Risk Serious Offenders Act
One difference is that the HRSO Act provides that the State has the onus of
satisfying the court that the person is a high risk serious
The CLMI Act does not contain any provisions regarding onus. However, in
practical terms, unless the Applicant places sufficient
material before the
court for it to be satisfied of the matters in CLMI Act s 110(3) or
s 114(2), the court is not empowered to make
the relevant order and must
discharge the person. I agree with the observation of Lemonis J in
Ultimately, my current thinking is that the Minister needs to ensure there is
acceptable and cogent evidence before the court directed
to the criteria in
s 110(3) and which facilitates a fair hearing of the application for an
ECO. That approach affords flexibility
as to what needs to be put before
the court. In all likelihood, that approach will often lead to a more truncated
hearing in respect
of applications for an ECO, in comparison to applications for
a restriction order under the HRSO Act. That being said, it should
thought that a more truncated hearing gives rise to unfairness. As a general
observation, in my experience, truncated hearings
often bring to light more
readily the critical information that the court needs to consider.
significant difference is that where the court is satisfied under the HRSO Act
that a person is a high risk serious offender,
make a restriction
contrast, under the CLMI Act, where the court is satisfied that the threshold
condition is met, the court
However, as Lemonis J observed in
... if the court is satisfied it is necessary to make an ECO to ensure adequate
protection of the community, almost inevitably the
court would exercise the
power to make such an order. I say 'almost inevitably' in recognition that
there might be some unique scenario
which militates against the making of an
ECO, although at the moment I cannot think of one.
the differences in
I again agree with the observation of Lemonis J in
that principles
applicable to the assessment of whether a person is a high risk serious offender
are an important guide in assessing
whether to make an
to the test in CLMI Act s 110(3), I agree with the observation of
... the question of whether a person 'will commit a serious offence' is assessed
by reference to whether the person will do an act,
or make an omission, that
would constitute a serious offence, irrespective of whether the person has
sufficient mental capacity to
be criminally responsible for that act or
omission. Thus, in making the assessment, the court does not take into account
the prospect
that the person might be found not guilty of the 'serious offence'
under s 27 of the Code. This approach accords with an object,
paramount consideration, of the CLMI Act being the protection of the community.
That object and paramount consideration would
be significantly eroded if the
assessment of the risk the person will 'commit' a serious offence took into
account whether the person
would have sufficient mental capacity to be
criminally responsible for their conduct.
also agree more generally with his Honour's distillation of the principles
pertaining to whether to make an
Consistently with the approach taken under the HRSO Act, the scheme of the
provisions pertaining to the making of an ECO requires
the court to do no more
than is necessary to achieve adequate protection of the community. This arises
from the use of the words
'adequate protection' and 'necessary' in s 110(3)
of the CLMI Act, and from the principles enunciated in s 7(2)(a) and
Further, while the paramount consideration of the CLMI Act is
the protection of the community, that is not the sole consideration.
consideration of the protection of the community has to be assessed by reference
to the particular provision that is engaged,
and not in the abstract. In that
respect, the language of s 110(3) directs attention to what is necessary to
achieve adequate protection
of the community and nothing more.
The assessment of whether the threshold condition at
s 110(3) is met requires the following two stage evaluation:
there is an unacceptable risk that the supervised person will do an act or make
an omission that would constitute a serious
offence, irrespective of whether the
person has sufficient mental capacity to be criminally responsible for that act
or omission;
so, whether it is necessary to make an ECO to ensure the adequate protection of
the community against that unacceptable risk.
The evaluation of whether the risk is unacceptable requires the court's judgment
as to the nature and extent of the possible harm.
That assessment directs
attention to the possible 'serious offences' that might be committed and the
harm they may cause. It also
directs attention to the likelihood that the
offender might commit such offences.
A person's mental impairment is part of their characteristics and thus informs
the assessment of risk. Their mental impairment will
also inform the assessment
of whether it is necessary to make an ECO to ensure adequate protection of the
It should not be assumed that if the court finds there is an 'unacceptable
risk', it automatically follows that it is necessary to
make an ECO to ensure
adequate protection of the community. Consistent with the approach taken under
the HRSO Act, the assessment
of 'necessity' requires recognition that a person's
entitlement to be at liberty should not be lightly denied. That approach takes
account of, but does not give primacy to, the principles set at s 7(2)(a) and
s 7(2)(e) of the CLMI Act.
Moreover, the assessment of necessity must have regard to the other protective
options available under the CLMI Act, in particular
whether the making of a
community supervision order provides adequate protection of the community. If
it does, then it will not
be necessary to make an ECO to ensure the adequate
protection of the community against the unacceptable risk.
The limiting term for an ECO needs to be set in accordance with the scheme of
the provisions. It follows that the term should be
no longer than is necessary
to achieve adequate protection of the community.
The phrase 'high degree of probability' used in
s 110(3) is also used in the HRSO Act and was used in the DSO Act. The
been said to connote a standard that is more than the civil standard
of 'balance of probabilities' but less than the criminal standard
reasonable doubt'... That approach should be adopted in respect of the use of
the phrase in the CLMI Act.
application of the test in CLMI Act s 110(3) was also considered by
Lundberg J in
General v PHB by his guardian ad litem Alan Van Der
Like Lemonis J in
Lundberg J was of the view that the principles relating to HRSO Act
7(3) provide useful guidance as to the test in CLMI Act s 110(3).
Specifically:
evaluation is first required as to whether there is an unacceptable risk that
the offender will commit a serious offence in the
future, in the absence of any
measures that would provide adequate protection of the community against that
or not a risk that an offender will commit a 'serious offence' is 'unacceptable'
is a question which requires the court's
judgment as to the nature and extent of
the possible harm... An 'unacceptable risk' is a risk that is not trivial
or transient.
assessment of the nature and extent of the possible harm directs attention to
the possible serious offences that might be committed
and the harm they may
cause. It also directs attention to the likelihood that the offender might
commit such offences (that is, the
likelihood the risk might eventuate). The
extent to which deterrent factors have operated to reduce risk in the past is
to the assessment of current and future risk, as is the offender's
historical and current response to rehabilitation. These are
all factors that
inform the assessment of whether the risk is 'unacceptable', but they are not
exhaustive.
the risk is found to be 'unacceptable', the nature and extent of that
unacceptable risk then informs the evaluation or assessment
as to whether an
extended custody order is necessary to ensure adequate protection of the
community. This assessment, that is whether
the order is necessary, requires
recognition that an offender's entitlement to be at liberty is not lightly to be
denied, and the
various objects and principles described in s 7(1) and
s 7(2) of the CLMI Act.
'high degree of probability' standard is a higher standard than the balance of
probabilities but is a lesser standard than the
standard of beyond reasonable
doubt, and is otherwise a standard that is incapable of further
definition...
Court does not have to be satisfied that there is a high degree of probability
that the offender will commit a serious offence.
Rather, it is the necessity to
make, in the case of the CLMI Act, a custody order in relation to the offender
to ensure the adequate
protection of the community against an unacceptable risk
that offender will commit a serious offence that must be proved to the requisite
evaluation of the level of risk according to the objects of the CLMI Act is
required, informed by the need to ensure adequate protection
of the community as
the paramount consideration.
mentioned, if the court is not satisfied as to the matter in CLMI Act
s 110(3), it may make a CSO in respect of the supervised
The test to be applied is set out in CLMI Act
Before making an extended community supervision order, the court must be
satisfied that, to ensure the adequate protection of the
community, the
supervised person should remain under supervision due to the person's
rehabilitation, retraining or resocialisation
requirements.
Lundberg J considered how this test is to be construed, which I again agree
The composite phrase, 'rehabilitation, retraining or resocialisation
requirements', which is used in s 114(2), is used elsewhere
legislation... The phrase is not defined, nor are the constituent words. The
text should be given its ordinary and natural
meaning, subject to context and
purpose. Further, the absence of any prescriptive definitions of these
terms emphasises that these
concepts are likely to be fact sensitive.
In the context of the CLMI Act, and without being exhaustive, the term
'rehabilitation' generally refers to the restoration of a
person to their former
health or to a life free of drugs and alcohol. A rehabilitation requirement
would include a recommended step
or plan which is necessary or appropriate to
return the person 'to a good, healthy, or normal life or condition after they
in prison, been very ill, etc.'...
The term 'retraining' refers generally to the process of training someone again,
and captures a broad range of vocational training
and programmes, although it is
possible the term also extends beyond training solely for employment purposes. A
retraining requirement
would include a recommended step or plan to prepare a
person for future vocational endeavours.
The term 'resocialisation' refers generally to a process of educating someone
for their resumption of normal social activities in
the community and, again, it
captures a broad range of matters directed to this purpose. A resocialisation
requirement would include
a recommended step or plan to educate a person 'to
behave around others in a way that is considered suitable or normal, for example
after difficult experiences that have affected their behaviour'...
As to this last term, the ordinary meaning of the term is largely consistent
with the language used in respect of the defined term
're‑socialisation
programme' in the
Sentence Administration Act
(WA)... Within that legislation, the defined term extends to the
equipping of a prisoner for 're-entry into the general community',
and addresses
matters such as 'drug and alcohol use', 'mental and physical health', 'attitudes
and social control', 'institutionalisation
and life skills', 'housing',
'financial support and debt', and 'family and community networks'.
The use of the term 'requirements' in the provision, and elsewhere in the
legislation where the composite concept is used, would
at least refer to
specific and identified steps or plans which the person is required to undertake
or which have been appropriately
recommended. I accept that the term is not
confined to such matters, and its reach may be broader.
It should at least be possible, however, for the applicant to identify a causal
link between the 'requirement' and the protection
of the community through
supervision by a representative of the Adult Community Corrections division.
the position in HRSO Act s 7(3), there are no matters which the court must
have regard to in determining whether to make an
ECO pursuant to CLMI Act
s 110(1). I agree with the observation by Lundberg J in
The absence of an express list of materials or factors emphasises that each
application for an extended custody order must be approached
on its particular
facts, and assessed by reference to:
(a) the statutory language employed within s 110, particularly the terms of
s 110(3) itself;
(b) the context as it emerges from pt 7 of the CLMI Act and the legislation as a
(c) together with the objects, principles, and the paramount consideration
identified in s 7 and s 8 of the
legislation.
matters set out in CLMI Act s 123(4) on which the court may receive
evidence provides an indication of the matters which may
Things that the court may receive in evidence for the purpose of determining the
application include the following -
(a) any document relevant to the supervised person's antecedents or criminal
(b) anything relevant contained in the official transcript of any relevant
proceeding against the person;
(c) any relevant material that was tendered to the court, or that informed the
court, in a relevant proceeding against the person;
(d) any report that a psychiatrist, psychologist or other appropriate expert
prepares under this Part and the extent to which the
person cooperated when the
expert examined the person;
(e) any other medical, psychiatric, psychological or other assessment relating
to the person;
(f) information indicating whether or not the person has a propensity to engage
in conduct that could constitute a serious offence
in the future;
(g) information indicating whether or not there is any pattern of offending
behaviour on the part of the
Act s 47(1) sets out matters to which the court
have regard when making an order
under pt 5, which includes a custody order made pursuant to s 46(1).
Those matters are not
exhaustive.
In respect of an adult, those matters are:
(a) the protection of the community;
(b) the nature of the offence and the circumstances of its commission;
(c) the person's character, antecedents, age and health;
(d) the nature of the person's mental impairment;
(e) the relationship between the mental impairment and the offending conduct;
(f) the degree of risk that the person appears to present to themself or the
safety of the community because of their mental impairment;
(g) the extent to which adequate resources are available for the treatment, care
and support of the person in the community;
Act s 47(1) is not directed to the making of an ECO, which is made under
pt 7. However, I again agree with Lemonis J that,
in most cases, the
factors set out in s 47(1) will likely be useful factors to have regard to
in assessing the criteria of 'unacceptable
risk' and 'necessity' prescribed by
Lundberg J, in
, adopted a
being so, and setting out the factors in a more logical order, I have assessed
the evidence in the present application under
the following
Respondent's personal circumstances;
Index Offending and the circumstances of its commission;
instances of violence;
nature of the Respondent's mental impairment;
relationship between the Respondent's mental impairment and the instances of
or not there is any pattern of offending behaviour on the part of the person;
efforts made to rehabilitate the Respondent to date.
there is an unacceptable risk that the Respondent will commit a serious offence;
so, whether it is necessary to make an ECO to ensure the adequate protection of
the community against that unacceptable risk; and
not, whether, to ensure the adequate protection of the community, the Respondent
should remain under supervision under an ESO due
to his rehabilitation,
retraining or resocialisation
requirements.
The Respondent's personal circumstances
Respondent was born in Broome and was 19 years of age at the time of the
Index Offending. He is now 52 years of age.
Respondent identifies as part of the Bardi Yawuru people. He grew up with
a large family, including eight siblings. His father
is from the Yawuru Tribe
whilst his mother is from the Beagle Bay community. He travelled between Derby,
Djarindjin, Lombadina,
One Arm Point, Beagle Bay and Broome, usually residing
with family members. His mother passed away in around 2020 and he was allowed
to attend her funeral. The Respondent has regular contact with his father, who
in recent times has visited him regularly in prison.
Since commencing his leave
of absence (
), the Respondent now
visits his father in the community, along with his siblings and extended family
and enjoys visiting their
completed his formal education when he was 15 years of age. When he left
school he had a number of jobs.
Respondent states that as a child, he was sexually abused by a man on Broome,
the man whom he subsequently attempted to kill.
Dr Petch opines that the
'amount of trauma he experienced in his young life may have been
significant'.
Respondent started sniffing petrol as a child and commenced using alcohol and
cannabis at approximately 14 years of age. He
used oral amphetamines
throughout his late teens and early 20s. He also used LSD intermittently.
He had an early involvement with
the criminal justice system which I
discuss later in these reasons.
the Index Offending, he has spent some 26 years in custody.
The remainder of the time he was on release orders which I will
out in more detail later in these reasons.
the Index Offending, the Respondent was diagnosed with chronic schizophrenia and
has been assessed as having cognitive
deficits that are chronic and persistent.
I will also go into more detail about the Respondent's mental impairments later
23 August 2018, the Office of the Public Advocate and Public Trustee were
respectively appointed the Respondent's plenary guardian
and administrator.
These orders were made on the basis that the State Administrative Tribunal was
satisfied that the Respondent
(a) unable, by reason of a mental disability, to make reasonable judgments in
respect of matters relating to all of his estate;
(b) in need of an administrator of his estate;
(c) incapable of looking after his own health and safety;
(d) unable to make reasonable judgments in respect of matters relating to his
(e) in need of oversight, care or control in the interests of his own health
and safety; and
(f) in need of a guardian.
These orders are due for
review by 1 August
The Index Offending and the circumstances of its
offences for which the Respondent was found not guilty on account of unsoundness
of mind on 12 April 1995 were
as follows:
(a) attempted murder contrary to CC s 283(1)
(b) stealing a firearm contrary to CC s 378
(c) stealing a motor vehicle contrary to CC s 371A and s 378
(d) attempted murder contrary to CC s 283(1)
(e) making a threat with intent to prevent or hinder the doing of an act by a
person who was lawfully entitled to do that act contrary
to CC s 338A(c)
(f) going armed in public without lawful occasion in such a manner as to cause
terror contrary to CC s 68 (
(g) making a threat with intent to prevent or hinder the doing of an act by a
person who was lawfully entitled to do that act contrary
to CC s 338A(c)
(h) attempted murder contrary to CC s 283(1)
offence of attempted murder is a 'serious offence' as defined in Schedule 1
of the CLMI Act. The offences the subject of counts
3, 4, 6, 7 and 8 are
not serious offences under the CLMI Act.
Index Offending was committed in two incidents.
first was on 19 October 1993. At about 9.00 pm, the Respondent went to
the home of the victim in Broome. He believed that the
victim had sexually
abused him when he was a twelve-year‑old child. During the incident, the
Respondent stood in the doorway
of the victim's residence with a knife and
lunged at him striking him on his hand. The victim tried to push the
Respondent out of
the unit. During the struggle the Respondent slashed the
victim with a knife several times. The victim was taken to hospital and
for knife wounds including three wounds on the left side of his abdomen, a slash
wound across his left hand and fingers,
as well as a slash wound to the back of
his right arm. The Respondent made full admissions to stabbing the victim with
the intention
of stabbing him to death as he continued to believe the victim was
a child molester.
second was on 29 November 1993. After being released on bail for the offending
which occurred on 19 October 1993, the Respondent
was living with his uncle
who had firearms in his house. The Respondent retrieved one of those guns
without consent. He then discharged
the firearm out of the window of his
sister's car with two children present. He proceeded to steal the car. He
drove to the unit
of the same victim as the 19 October offending. The
Respondent saw that the victim's car was at the address and started yelling
swearing at him. He then raised the rifle, and from a short distance fired two
shots at the unit, intending to kill the victim.
The victim was inside and
immediately called police. The Respondent sped off, ramming the victim's car on
his way. A high‑speed
chase with Police then ensued. During this chase,
the Respondent threatened police by lifting his rifle outside the window and
it at an officer, as well as a civilian.
the same date, the Respondent then went back to the victim's house and again
pointed the rifle at a police officer to prevent
the officer pursuing him. The
officer fled the scene. The Respondent got back in the car and police chased
him. The Respondent
lost control of the car, abandoned it and ran away on foot
still carrying the rifle. Police were yelling at him to drop the gun.
Respondent stopped running, turned around and pointed the rifle at an officer
from a short distance away with the intention
of firing the rifle to kill the
officer. When the Respondent failed to drop the gun, the officer fired a
warning shot into the ground.
The Respondent then dropped the rifle and got on
the ground before he was arrested. The Respondent made admissions to attending
the victim's address in order to kill him: 'Those things in my mind tell me to
do it'. He also made admissions to pointing the rifle
at police 'to kill
Other instances of violence
first conviction recorded on the Respondent's criminal history was in
at age 15, however it appears that the Respondent first interacted with the
criminal justice system at the age of
1990 and 1994 the Respondent committed around 30 offences. These included
multiple convictions for assaults, public disorder,
firearms offences, offences
relating to cannabis and driving offences. This included in December 1991
when he was sentenced to six
months' imprisonment and in April 1992 when he
breached probation and was sentenced to 18 months' imprisonment. Following
his release
in June 1993, the Respondent committed the Index Offending, in
October and November 1993. He spent 506 days in custody on
for the Index Offending.
is instructive to consider the instances of violence by the Respondent after the
Index Offending in the context of the custodial
arrangements which he was
subject to at the time. There is a most helpful chronology of the custodial
arrangements to which the Respondent
was subject to and the instances of
violence recorded in the
Petch 2025 Report.
This is supplemented by the material in the 2025 ACC Report.
1996 until October 1998 the Respondent was admitted to the Frankland
Centre. During this time, the Respondent made unprovoked
attacks on other
patients and
26 October 1998 and 26 January 2004, whilst subject to the existing
custody order, the Respondent was released into the community
subject to a
conditional release order (
However, during this time he also spent some periods in the Frankland Centre
over at least six separate admissions. This was
due to his psychiatric symptoms
placing his family, with whom he was staying, in harm. There are comments to
the effect that his
illness had been exacerbated by non-compliance with his
medication regime, the use of cannabis and the use of
27 January 2004, the Respondent was arrested and returned to custody in relation
(a) one count of unlawful wounding contrary to CC
committed on 27 January
(b) one count of indecent assault contrary to CC s
committed on 14 January
unlawful wounding charge related to the Respondent leaving his residential
address in Broome and walking up the street to the
victim's address. The
Respondent walked up to the front door of the victim's unit and knocked on the
door. The victim opened the
door, and the Respondent kept trying to open the
security door of the unit, after several attempts he opened the security door.
The victim ran from the unit towards her neighbour's house. The Respondent
followed her with a long, serrated edge kitchen knife
in his hand. The victim
either slipped or was pushed to the ground by the Respondent who then began
thrusting the knife at her in
a stabbing motion several times. One of the blows
hit her in her right hand causing a laceration to her fingers and another hit
her on the forearm. A neighbour came to the rescue of the victim and the
Respondent got off the victim and ran from the scene.
charge of indecent assault involved the Respondent being alone with his
13-year‑old niece watching TV. His niece was lying
on the couch when he
took off his clothes, approached the victim, climbed on top of her whilst he was
completely naked with his knees
either side of her. The victim screamed, pushed
the Respondent off her, and ran away to her mother's room.
of the further offending, on 13 February 2004 the Mentally Impaired Accused
Review Board (
) cancelled the
16 September 2004, the Respondent was found unfit to stand trial for the
offences of unlawful wounding and indecent assault.
A further custody
order was imposed. The Respondent was unconditionally discharged from this
second custody order by the Governor
in Executive Council on 15 July
the Respondent returned to custody he was readmitted to the Frankland Centre.
Whilst there in June 2005 he assaulted another
patient in response to
paranoid delusions. He moved back into the prison system spending time at
Hakea, Roebourne Regional Prison,
Broome Regional Prison and Casuarina Prison.
Whilst in prison he assaulted prison officers on 26 May 2009, 19 June
2009 and 24 June
2009. The first appears to have been connected auditory
hallucinations. The second and third are recorded as being unprovoked.
9 March 2010 the Respondent again assaulted a prison officer, punching the
officer in the face many times without warning or obvious
reason. He appeared to
have chronic negative symptoms of schizophrenia at the time.
24 December 2010 at Acacia Prison the Respondent assaulted another prisoner
whilst queuing for his evening meal.
31 July 2014, the Respondent assaulted another prisoner.
25 March 2015, the Respondent assaulted another prisoner.
medical reports for the periods in between the assaults record the Respondent's
mental state to have been relatively stable.
November 2019, the Respondent assaulted another prisoner.
at Broome Regional Prison, the Respondent incurred over 15 incidents of
unprovoked physical assaults on other prisoners between
5 March 2017 and
14 June 2023. The Respondent received prison sanctions as well as a brief
transfer to West Kimberley Regional Prison.
However, it appeared to not improve
behaviours as he continued to incur incidents of physical assaults. Further,
whilst he was attending
a capacity building activity at Bankwest Broome, the
Respondent assaulted a security guard on 23 December 2022.
Recommendations
were made to increase the Respondent's security rating and transfer to a more
suitable facility. This resulted in
him being transferred to Acacia Prison on
16 June 2023. Whilst at Acacia Prison the Respondent incurred several
incidents of physical
assault. On 21 December 2023, 28 July 2024,
28 August 2004, 1 November 2024 and 27 December 2024 he assaulted
other prisoners by
punching them to the face. He received prison sanctions.
Respondent was transferred from Acacia Prison to a regional prison on
9 January 2025 following a Tribunal appearance on 8 November
being at the regional prison, he recorded one incident of violence. This was on
5 March 2025 when he punched another prisoner
to the head without
provocation.
18 August 2025, the Respondent assaulted a support worker from Yadah Care
) whist in the community
on a LOA. Yadah provides the Respondent with community, supported accommodation
and social services pursuant
to his NDIS funding. The incident is described in
the 2025 Tribunal Report by Ms Secker in the following
On the 18.08.2025 an incident was reported by Yadah Care Services, where [the
Respondent] punched one of his support workers to the
face without
warning. The support worker immediately asked [the Respondent] why he
had done so, with [the Respondent] walking away
with no explanation. Upon the
staff member further approaching [the Respondent], he reported acknowledged his
mistake, expressed
remorse and apologised to the support worker with a
handshake. When another staff member spoke to [the Respondent] about this
he again apologised and stated it occurred as he believed the support
worker was going to assault his father and thought he must
defend him. This
behaviour is consistent with [the Respondent's] previous unprovoked use of
violence, appearing to be triggered by
him misreading body language. To avoid
further incidents of a like nature, Yadah Care Services have implemented
strategies including
to ensure safe distances are kept between [the Respondent]
and his relatives to avoid triggering further misunderstanding from [the
Respondent].
Tribunal, having considered this report, and noting the incidents at [69] and
[70], confirmed its
have been no further
themes emerge from this evidence. The first is that the Respondent has an
entrenched tendency to resort to violence, including
unprovoked violence, whist
in custody. The second is the offending appears to correlate to his mental
state. He appears much less
likely to offend when his mental state is stable.
In relation to this Dr Petch
He seemed to function reasonably well in prison. The routine and structure
provided by the regime may have suited him. Sometimes
there were difficulties in
prison, but these minor and were not persistent. He never used alcohol or,
I understand, drugs in prison.
He did not usually cause significant
difficulties in prison: in the main he was reported to have been polite,
respectful to staff,
and cooperative. His psychosis has fluctuated. He has been
on continuous treatment. There have been times when he has been relatively
stable, but at other times he has described various psychotic symptoms. The
negative features of his schizophrenia slowly emerged,
and his psychotic
symptoms were most evident when he assaulted staff or other prisoners which
occurred from time to time.
On the face of it this suggests from the records that I have seen that the rate
of assaults may be increasing in frequency. There
may be a number of
explanations for this. The first is that this may be an artifact if not all
previous assaults have been accurately
recorded. Tolerance to the assaults may
have reduced over time so latterly all assaults may have been documented whereas
not previously. Over time the seriousness of the assaults may have
It is also possible that the rate of assaults have in fact been steadily
increasing. This is possible and there may be a number of
possible reasons for
this. [The Respondent] has been noted in the past to be sensitive to changes in
dose of medication. At times
he may have suffered from a variety of side
effects, some of which he may have found difficult to bear and may have had an
upon his demeanour and reduced his tolerance. Over time he may have
become less tolerant to prison life which can be very challenging
at times. The
nature of his schizophrenia may also be changing, and he may be becoming less
able to contain himself when psychotic
phenomena occur.
The nature of the assaults appears to be similar
over time. The characteristic assault is quick, a single punch, and is not
sustained. These would not appear to constitute serious violence as set
out in Schedule 1 of the Act. (One more serious and sustained
assault on a
prison officer resulting in concussion and compensation might have fallen into
the bracket of GBH but no changes appear
to have been bought.) For the most part
[the Respondent] is usually described as relatively stable and well, until
shortly afterwards
when an incident occurs. This is therefore difficult if not
impossible to predict these assaults as they appear to come out of nowhere.
Most appear to have been unprovoked. They almost always appear to be related to
psychotic symptoms. [The Respondent] himself is
at odds to explain what happened
after some of the incidents that have taken place. Sometimes he perceived that
the other person
has been talking about him, and this leads to the violence. On
many occasions he has not been able to explore why, even if they were
have been much more severe if a weapon was
to hand when the assaults were
initiated. Two assaults have allegedly occurred in the community, so the risk
is not confined to
the custodial environment. These also both occurred on
innocent people without warning.
do note in the Respondent's favour that whilst in custody he has been subject to
over 100 breathalyser tests and 40 urine substance
screenings which
have all returned negative
The nature of the Respondent's mental impairment
assessing the nature of the Respondent's mental impairment, it is sufficient to
consider two reports in detail.
first is the Petch 2025 Report prepared for the purposes of the present
application. In this report, Dr Petch sets out a very
detailed analysis of
all the materials available in relation to the Respondent. He opines that
the Respondent suffers from paranoid
schizophrenia, alcohol use disorder and
multiple drug use disorders.
Schizophrenia
is a psychiatric syndrome characterized by psychotic symptoms of hallucinations,
delusions, and disorganised speech,
by negative symptoms such as decreased
motivation and diminished expressiveness, and by cognitive deficits involving
impaired executive
functions, memory, and speed of mental processing. The
Respondent's psychosis consists of delusions, hallucinations and thought
to the Respondent's cognitive deficits, Dr Perch
There has been chronic bluntening of affect which has been incongruous. At times
he has presented as bland and jovial with a fatuous
grin and laughter. There was
often poor rapport, with no spontaneity. He was described as always mildly
perplexed. Sometimes when
well he could be friendly and warm. His level of
thinking was occasionally deemed sketchy and shallow. At other times he was
and distracted. There was often intermittent eye contact. He was thought
to have been tracking unseen stimuli, and he was sometimes
distracted, perplexed
or preoccupied. He often wanted to leave interviews quickly and could start to
become somewhat agitated. He
had poor social skills and was reliant on
others for support.
On testing there were impairments in verbal comprehension and processing speed,
and there was impairment in executive functioning
(meaning planning, mental
flexibility, organisation, coordination, sequencing, inhibition and generation
of novel ideas).
[The Respondent] usually had little insight into his illness, symptoms or
behaviour, and judgement seemed to be chronically impaired.
At times he could
be highly impulsive, usually in response to a psychotic experience. After
attacks, rarely could he describe what
he had done or why, and he was sometimes
perplexed or confused, offering little or no rational or even psychotic
explanation.
In my view it is clear that [the Respondent] fulfills the diagnostic criteria
for schizophrenia. It appears to be chronic, treatment
resistant, and currently
in partial remission at present, with treatment. There is a significant
potential to relapse. Whilst he
may be psychotic much of the time, experiencing
the effects of his illness to a greater or lesser extent, for the most part he
control his responses to it. There are certain psychotic experiences he
cannot tolerate, and when these occur he acts out, sometimes
violently. This is
where his risk lies.
giving evidence Dr Petch explained that the schizophrenia being treatment
resistant means that, despite treatment, there still
remains significant
says that one drug used for treatment resistant schizophrenia is clozapine. He
outlined the difficulty between balancing
the high dose required to address the
Respondent's symptoms with its serious side
Once a number of treatments have been tried in adequate doses for long enough,
schizophrenia can attract the label treatment resistant,
and that was the case
with [the Respondent]. Many combinations of drugs are then tried. Clozapine is
an antipsychotic drug that
is used for treatment resistant schizophrenia. In
some people who are otherwise treatment resistant, schizophrenia does respond
this drug. In [the Respondent's] case this occurred, but only up to a point. His
symptoms were significantly reduced and his degree
of functionality gradually
but significantly improved. However, even with high doses this was not
sufficient to eradicate his symptoms
altogether, so from time to time he
continued to experience psychosis. When this occurred, it led to repeated bouts
of unexpected
and unpredictable interpersonal impulsive violence.
Unfortunately, clozapine in high doses can also cause severe and very dangerous
or unpleasant side effects which can limit their
desirability and the dose that
can be prescribed. Clozapine also requires regular blood monitoring, because it
has a rare side effect
of neutropenia (destruction of white blood cells, thereby
robbing the body of its mechanism for infection control, which can be lethal).
Side effects of this medication experienced by [the Respondent] were at times
extreme. It was difficult to balance his need for
higher doses of clozapine to
control his psychosis and spontaneous violence, but to limit his side effects
which at times very severe
and were dose dependent.
giving evidence, Dr Petch explained that it is important that the
Respondent undergo regular blood testing, ideally monthly.
This is for two
reasons. The first is to test for a particular adverse side effect of
clozapine. The second is to ensure that
the levels of clozapine in the
Respondent's blood remains at a therapeutic level in order to keep the psychosis
under control. He
explained that things like smoking, drinking and other
medications would all potentially have an impact on the way the body metabolises
the clozapine. In other words, the same dose could have a lesser effect. The
blood testing would also monitor whether the Respondent
was taking his
medication in the
In regard to this, Dr Petch was of the view that the Respondent is more
likely to forget to take his medication due to disorganisation,
than out of an
intent to cease the
medication.
went on to describe the complications which can arise if a patient stops taking
If he did stop taking Clozapine for one day, two days, three days, how quickly
would he destabilise?‑‑‑I don't
You don't know?‑‑‑I don't know. Part of the problem with
Clozapine is that after about day 4, it's very difficult
just to restart it.
It's not as if you can just go back to the dose that you were taking before,
because there is a bodily reaction
to not having the drug onboard for a few
days. So the level goes right down so that when you restart it, you have to
start again
at 12.5 milligrams, and you gradually increase very, very slowly
over a period of weeks, if not months, until you get back to the
therapeutic
dose you were on before. That's for medical reasons. Now, there are cases
where people have stopped taking medications
for a week and then gone straight
quite a dangerous
drug to restart, so you have to do it very slowly. The
trouble is, in restarting slowly, is that then you have a more prolonged
without the medication onboard, and that's when a mental health deterioration
The consequence is that the Respondent would then be on a lower
dose of clozapine than was required to optimally manage his symptoms
period of time while the dose is gradually increased to the dose he was on
before forgetting to take the medication.
opines that the development of schizophrenia predated the Index
Despite his difficulties, his violence and other offending ensured prison
sentences. He chose to ignore some court orders and parole
conditions, and he
was breached on some occasions. Some of these occasions involved hindering or
violence to arresting or other officers.
His behaviour persisted into adulthood, and he started to spend some time in
custody. It was during one of these stays that he may
have started developing
schizophrenia. At some stage before the index offences the is evidence to
suggest that [the Respondent] had
developed psychosis, even though his
schizophrenia was not diagnosed until after the offences had occurred. The
development of schizophrenia
coincided with a period of heavy alcohol and drug
use. Psychotic symptoms recorded at the time of the offences included multiple
delusions of reference, thought insertion and thought broadcast, delusions of
persecution and auditory hallucinations, including
command hallucinations.
After the offences, when he was taken into custody it was noted that his
psychotic symptoms may have been
present for six months or more. He stated that
he had started to hear the voices before his previous release from prison in
1993. His psychosis started to be treated and he showed an initial
response. The psychiatrist who saw him concluded that the effect
of the illness
at the time of the index offences was to deprive him of his capacity to control
his actions. He thought that the
schizophrenia was more important than the
substance misuse. The jury agreed and he was acquitted due to unsoundness of
equivalent of a custody order was imposed.
relation to the diagnosis of alcohol use disorder, Dr Petch
His alcohol use disorder is currently in remission by virtue of him being in a
controlled environment. This includes the prison,
but also when he is in the
community. I understand that he has not used alcohol since the custody order
was imposed. He has done
well to remain abstinent. However, it is probable that
even after a significant period of time since he last used alcohol, his
predilection
for alcohol remains, and relapse is still possible. Alcohol is a
determinant of his risk of future serious offending. He has acknowledged
most of his serious violence and much of his other offending occurred whilst he
was intoxicated. Alcohol may disinhibit him.
If [the Respondent] was indeed alcohol dependent on alcohol, it is possible that
with resumption of alcohol use, symptoms of dependency
may recur. Once starting
alcohol consumption, he may find it difficult to stop. His psychosis may still
be sensitive to its effects,
and he may therefore become mentally unstable if he
uses significant quantities. Alcohol may also interfere with the medication
is taking and may reduce its effectiveness. To enhance his stability therefore,
if alcohol is to be consumed it should be in
small quantities only. It would be
preferable for no alcohol to be consumed, but he has expressed a preference to
resume alcohol
use, but to do so would not be without risk. He has not been
through treatment programs while in prison and he does not have a relapse
prevention plan.
With each passing day of sobriety, his risk of relapse of his alcohol use
disorder is reducing. However, I think that without ongoing
intervention, and
the control in the environment that exists in the context of his custody order,
support, monitoring and supervision,
the risk of relapse into further alcohol
use is still significant. The risks should he relapse are serious, and
exponentially increases
the risk of serious offending.
relation to the diagnosis of substance abuse disorder, Dr Petch
[The Respondent] has a history of being dependent on solvents and drugs when he
was a teenager or in his early adult life. This
includes volatile solvents,
cannabis, and amphetamines and occasionally LSD. Although the exact quantities
he claims to have used
have varied, the theme has been consistent and clear. He
first used volatile solvents, his cannabis use was also reportedly chronic,
the effects of this were probably not as serious. Use of stimulants continued
until he was incarcerated. Although some drugs
are known to precipitate
psychosis, in his case his psychosis took the form of schizophrenia. His
psychosis may sometimes have deteriorated
or been exacerbated by drugs.
His drug use is now in remission by virtue of the restrictions under his custody
order. He has stated he no longer wishes to use.
He has avoided its use. His
substance misuse is currently in remission, but in a controlled environment.
The drug use has contributed to offending. He may have committed acquisitive
offences to fund his habit, some of his offences were
drug related, his drug use
almost certainly made a contribution to his psychosis (later schizophrenia), and
in turn the disturbances
caused by this disorder also made a contribution to his
behaviour. He was deemed unsound of mind at the time of his index offences
unfit to plead at the time of his later offences, both due to psychosis. The
schizophrenia was the substantial contributing
factor, but drugs will have made
a contribution too. To minimise further risk, drug use should be avoided. He
has not undertaken
any programmes to address his substance misuse and has no
relapse plan regarding its use.
Respondent is on a detailed regime of medication, including clozapine. He also
suffers from a number of medical issues, some
of which appear to reflect common
side effects of the
diagnoses by Dr Petch are consistent with the numerous other medical
reports in the materials before the court going back to
the time of the Index
Offending. In particular, it is consistent with the report of Dr Nicholas
Ho, who provided a psychiatric report
to the Tribunal dated 12 August
also note that the Respondent has engaged in a number of incidents of
self-harming behaviour over the past 20 or so
second report is a neuropsychological assessment report by Dr Mandy
Vidovich dated 21 December
Dr Vidovich concluded that the Respondent had cognitive and adaptive
Anticipating [the Respondent's] level of intellectual functioning was
complicated by the lack of available information regarding
his educational
background and his limitations as a historian. There was, however, no
identified experience of closed head injury
or other neurological insult, with
the most prominent feature being that of his psychiatric illness. Similarly,
there was no information
to suggest an intellectual disability, although a
low‑level of pre‑morbid functioning would seem evident in the
of features of his test profile.
Results within his current neuropsychological
profile identified deficits across a number of domains. Reductions in his
attentional
capacity, and processing speed contributed to variability in his
performances and at least mild impairment in memory functioning.
Whilst scoring
poorly on expressive language measures, this appeared undermined by cultural
factors. Visuo-constructional skills
remained preserved, however, working
memory and executive deficits influenced the quality of additional
non‑verbal performances.
The observed executive deficits were
characterised by difficulty with reasoning, problem solving, organisation and
shifting set.
He demonstrated limited literacy and numeracy skills.
Despite his IQ scores meeting criteria for an Intellectual Disability, when [the
Respondent's] performances are considered in the
context of his cultural and
language background, together with the known cognitive impact of schizophrenia,
some of his poorer results
are readily accounted for. Whilst an assessment of
his adaptive abilities was not undertaken, the likelihood of functional deficits
is however high. [the Respondent's] profile of results and history are
unlikely to meet the criteria set by the DSC regarding identified
disability. That is, significant deficits in general intellectual functioning
and adaptive behaviour, need to have manifest
before 18 years of age and, under
the cognitive disability criteria, the impairment identified is not readily
explainable by psychiatric
illness or a primary psychiatric disability.
Notwithstanding his needs, it would remain questionable as to whether
appropriate community support services would be available to
him. His cognitive
and adaptive deficits are likely to be chronic and persistent. Most relevant
are the executive and memory impairments
which are considered salient
compromising factors with respect to his capacity to manage in the community
without significant oversight.
The combination of his psychiatric condition
and low level of functioning make him particularly vulnerable in the absence of
a well‑structured
and supervised environment (ie, currently the prison).
He has also been institutionalised for a lengthy period of time, further
limiting his resourcefulness for independent living. I am not aware of any
additional support services, given his age, and primary
mental health needs,
that would provide funded care options, particularly within a regional setting
and would defer to the local
corrections facility to make further comment with
respect to such. As a final comment, consideration may wish to be given to the
appointment of a Guardian given the observed level of cognitive impairment and
likely restrictions with respect to decision making.
The relationship between the Respondent's mental
impairment and the instances of violence
psychiatric report relied on at the trial of the Index Offending was provided by
Dr O'Dea dated 29 November
Dr O'Dea's conclusions were as
[The Respondent] is suffering from a mental illness, namely a schizophrenic
illness, that has responded satisfactorily to treatment.
This illness is
characterised by auditory and visual hallucinations, delusions of reference
regarding the television and other abnormal
perceptions, including thought
sharing. These symptoms appear to be under adequate control at present while he
is prescribed anti‑psychotic
medication. This illness is complicated by a
long history of drug and alcohol abuse. Although a number of the psychotic
mentioned can be induced by amphetamine and other psychoactive
substances of abuse, it is important to note that [the Respondent]
continued to
describe the psychotic symptoms for an extended period following apparent
abstinence from the psychoactive substances
he abuses. Therefore, it is more
likely that he is suffering from a process schizophrenic illness rather than a
drug induced psychosis.
It is likely that he has suffered from a post‑traumatic stress disorder in
relation to the alleged sexual abuse in his childhood.
This has been
characterised by recurring intrusive thoughts and nightmares of a distressing
nature regarding the alleged abuse.
Despite his psychiatric problems, [the Respondent] is currently fit to appear in
court and plead to the charges.
Although the exact chronology is unclear, it appears probable that [the
Respondent] has been suffering from acute symptoms of schizophrenia
since prior
to his release from prison in June 1993. I make this judgement on the basis of
his account of his symptoms, the statements
contained in the prosecution brief
as outlined above, his presentation as described by Dr Bathgate on 1.12.93
and the usual course
of a schizophrenic illness.
Therefore, I consider that, at the time of both of the alleged offences, [the
Respondent] was suffering from a mental illness to
such an extent as to deprive
him of his capacity to control his actions. Also, this illness would have
impaired his ability to reason
and make judgements about the appropriateness or
otherwise of his actions at these times.
It is encouraging to note that [the Respondent] no longer describes suffering
psychotic symptoms since July 1994 and that he appears
insightful of his illness
and need for treatment. Therefore, if he continues to be compliant with his
anti‑psychotic medication
and abstinent from drugs and alcohol, the risk
of relapse of his illness and his violent outbursts would be minimised.
Regardless of the outcome of the trial, [the Respondent] would benefit from
ongoing treatment and supervision of his mental illness.
This should
involve regular psychiatric supervision of his medication, his compliance with
drugs and alcohol rehabilitation, and
support with community
jury agreed with Dr O'Dea. I accept that there was a clear relationship
between the Respondent's mental impairment and the Index
The disorder has made a very significant contribution to his offending, as his
perceptions, impulses, and behaviour (previously in
combination with
intoxication) are distorted, and coupled with disinhibition (from his disorder
and intoxication) made his earlier
violent offending significantly more likely.
The lower-level violence seen recently has occurred in the absence of
intoxication.
If intoxication were to occur, this may make the psychosis worse.
Coupled with the associated disinhibition, the risk of more serious
would be likely to escalate.
is also a clear relationship between the Respondent's mental impairment and his
subsequent violence behaviour. As I have noted,
he appears much less likely to
offend when his mental state is stable.
Whether or not there is any pattern of offending
behaviour on the part of the Respondent
my assessment, the Respondent has an entrenched tendency or propensity to resort
to violence, including unprovoked violence.
However, the pattern over the past
20 years has been for low level violence, typically a single punch to the
face. These offences
occurred even though he was subject to medical treatment
in a supervised environment.
identified multiple factors that were drivers for his
the past alcohol (normal for him to help with coping and stress);
the past solvents;
the past other drugs (cannabis, methamphetamines);
emotional regulation;
impulsivity
and recklessness;
decision making and impaired judgement, with poor critical reasoning skills;
of consequential thinking (especially when stressed, aroused, emotional or
intoxicated);
response to authority;
self-management with difficulties controlling his emotions;
difficulties
in relationships with poor social skills and problem solving;
factors in the environment;
of community supports;
structures or purpose to his day;
of employment skills;
life skills to cope with stress in the community;
level of insight.
The efforts made to rehabilitate the Respondent to date
Early efforts
Respondent's early efforts at rehabilitation were not successful.
to the Index Offending, the Respondent had been subject to two terms of
probation (December 1991 and December 1992). Both orders
cancelled. Whilst the specific reasons are unknown due to being historical
data, it appears that it was because of further
Respondent was placed on a conditional release order between 26 October
1998 and 13 February 2004. However, this was cancelled
offending which I have set out at [54] to [56].
2024 Tribunal Orders
3 October 2024, the Tribunal granted the Respondent a LOA order in the
following terms (
Tribunal LOA
leave of absence for the purpose of receiving emergency, medical, dental or
other such treatment which is not available at
the place of custody.
leave of absence on compassionate, cultural and/pr religious grounds, including
funerals, subject to the approval of the
Superintendent or their delegate, as
per Corrective Services policy.
leave of absence in the community for up to eight hours per day for the purpose
of undertaking activities which assist with
reintegration, under the supervision
of service providers approved by the Department of Justice and/or service
providers provided
through [the Respondent's] National Disability Insurance
Scheme (NDIS) plan, subject to the approval of the Superintendent or their
delegate, as per Corrective Services policy.
leave of absence, overnight for up to three days per week, which may be taken
individually or consecutively, from 8am on
the first day to 8pm on the final
day, to reside at a property provided by service providers approved by the
Department of Justice
and/or service providers provided through [the
Respondent's] National Disability Insurance Scheme (NDIS) plan, subject to the
of the Superintendent or their delegate, as per Corrective Services
leave of absence, including overnight leave if appropriate, to participate in
activities similar to those approved under
Prisons Act 1981
(WA), subject to the approval of the Superintendent or their delegate, as per
Corrective Services policy.
comply with all instructions from the treating psychiatrist and/or medical
practitioner and/or mental health team, including taking
appropriate medications
as directed.
comply with the lawful directions of the Supervising Officer.
have no direct or indirect contact with the victim.
abstain from using alcohol and illicit drugs.
to leave the State of Western Australia except with, and in accordance with, the
permission of the Tribunal.
that time, the Respondent has been supervised by
mentioned, the Respondent was transferred from Acacia Prison to a regional
prison on 9 January 2025 following a Tribunal appearance
on 8 November
2024. The Tribunal considered it imperative he was transferred to the regional
prison as a matter of priority to commence
his transition into the community and
to utilise his LOA, specifically noting that support services had been
Respondent commenced community access on his LOA in January 2025. I will
come back to how this has progressed later in these
reasons. Since
commencing his LOA periods, the Respondent has engaged with ACC on a regular
basis. He appears to be positively
mentioned, the Respondent's supervising SCCO is Ms Secker. She aims to see
the Respondent each week. Ms Secker is part of an
interagency team working
with the Respondent to oversee his rehabilitation and manage risk-related
concerns. The other members of
the interagency team
Interagency Group
(a) other staff from ACC;
(b) his lawyer (who was counsel in the hearing before me);
(c) a Specialist Support Coordinator from Eunoia Lane Specialist Support
Coordination (
), who coordinates
some of his NDIS Services;
(d) a representative from Yadah;
(e) a Positive Behaviour Support Specialist from SAL Consulting, another service
provider funded though NDIS;
(f) a representative from Kimberley Mental Health, Drug and Alcohol Service
(g) the Respondent's guardian from the Public Advocate;
(h) an advocate from Mental Health Advocacy Services;
(i) a representative from Job Pathways, a job network provider; and
(j) a representative from the regional
it apparent from the previous paragraph, the Respondent has significant NDIS
The bulk of the funding is for supported independent living. This is to be
provided by Yadah.
is also funding for:
(a) assistance with social, economic and community participation;
(b) capacity building supports to build the Respondent's skills and increase his
independence;
(c) behaviour support, to be provided by SAL Consulting;
(d) improved daily living skills, to be provided by an Occupational Therapist;
(e) funding for coordination and management.
Leaves of absence
Respondent commenced community access on his LOA in January 2025.
Initially he was leaving the prison three times per week for
three hours per
day, with two support staff in his company at all times. These LOA periods
focused on reintegration and spending
time with family, then incorporating
capacity building as his community access increased. The Respondent then
progressed gradually
to five consecutive days of daily access between
9.00 am and 3.00 pm on weekdays and 9.00 am to 8.00 pm on
Respondent commenced overnight stays on 4 July 2025. Part of the
Respondent's NDIS funding is used though Yadah to provide him
with supported
accommodation. He lives in a granny flat behind a residence occupied by support
Respondent's overnight stays have progressed from the week commencing
18 August 2025 to three nights per week. Since 30 June
2025, he has
only required one support staff. From 8 September 2025, the overnight
stays were increased to four nights a week.
On the days where he returns to
prison overnight, he spends most of the day in the community. The overnight
stays have been successful
with no issues or concerns noted. During contact
with ACC, the Respondent reported he was initially nervous spending nights in
community, however, has begun to settle into this routine and is now feeling
less anxious. As he has been spending regular time
at his accommodation during
day leave, he reports feeling comfortable in this environment and appears to
have responded well to the
increase in his community
Respondent is keen to spend more nights in the
Respondent's medical care is undertaken by the regional prison. It provides him
with a Webster Pack of medications and a checklist
for his support workers for
his leave in the
giving evidence, Dr Petch noted the particular importance of the Respondent
regularly taking his clozapine, which I have set
out at [83].
an ECO were to be made, medical responsibility for the Respondent would remain
with the regional prison. If a CSO was made, or
there was no order, the
plan is for medical responsibility for the Respondent to be passed to the local
Aboriginal medical service.
A referral has been made to facilitate this
Respondent has been referred to KMHDS, who will take over management of his
mental health issues once he moves from a prison
setting to a community
Respondent attends a local men's group once a
Drug and alcohol issues
Respondent has not used alcohol or illicit substance whilst on LOA. As noted,
prison records inform that the Respondent has provided
negative drug test
samples throughout his term of imprisonment, last providing a sample on
in the prison system, the Respondent has not undertaken any programs addressing
his drug and substance abuse issues. Nor
has he been referred to any program of
this kind whilst on leave in the
However, Dr Petch was of the view that, the Respondent would not cope with
a group program. Rather, given his cognitive impairments,
he would require a
tailor made, individually delivered, program which would provide him with
information at a rate which he could
mentioned, the Respondent is engaged with Job Pathways. They have linked him
with a program which assists him in basic learning
and job readiness. The
Respondent has an identified interest in horticulture and investigations into
suitable courses are
my view, there are significant resources available for the treatment, care and
support of the Respondent in the community. The
issue is whether they are
adequate or sufficient to protect the community for the risk of further
offending by the Respondent.
Is there is unacceptable risk that the Respondent will
commit a serious offence?
noted at [26], the evaluation to be undertaken is whether there is an
unacceptable risk that the offender will commit a serious
offence in the future,
in the absence of any measures that would provide adequate protection of the
community against that risk.
Secker concludes the 2025 Tribunal Report with the observation that
ACC has ongoing concerns as to the Respondent's propensity
to respond with
violence when feeling threatened.
In context:
Since his last review by the Tribunal, [the Respondent's] re-integration into
the community has generally been positive, with the
exception of the above noted
prison incident (05.03.2025) and community incident (18.08.2025). He appears to
be adjusting to remaining
overnight in the community and reports to be enjoying
doing so. Efforts are being made to ensure [The Respondent] is engaged in
capacity building to maximise his independence, as well as providing him with
structured activities to increase community engagement
and support. [The
Respondent] continues to be well supported by his family and his interagency
team, noting although the above two
incidents have been recorded, there was a
gap of five months between incidents, which demonstrates a marked improvement
previous review, where he had been involved in two incidents of
violence in a two-month period (01.11.2024 and 27.12.2024). Given
there remain ongoing concerns relating to [the Respondent's] propensity to
respond with violence when feeling threatened,
which may pose risk related
issues should he engage in this behaviour whilst in the community. Strategies
are to continue being
implemented to minimise the risk of further incidents
occurring, both within the prison and a community setting.
giving evidence, Ms Secker confirmed this
Is that still a concern held by Adult Community
Corrections?‑‑‑I would say it is at this point in time. As
in my report, the most recent incident that has demonstrated this was
on 18 August, and while I mentioned in my report there has
been an improvement
in the frequency of these incidents, there is concerns that they are still
occurring. The pattern of this behaviour
is generally pretty consistent. As
mentioned – I believe I mentioned it in my report, it's generally when
[the Respondent]
feels there is a risk to him or a risk to his family members,
in particular his father in this incident. Therefore, I would suggest
does still remain a concern, moving forward. Whilst the incidents have been
less frequent of recent, given it did occur
within the last approximately two
months, we would still have a concern that this behaviour may present again in
the future.
concludes that although the Respondent has progressed with rehabilitation
efforts and his violence seems to have diminished,
the risk of offending
continues to be an
As he has progressed with rehabilitation efforts, so violence seems to have
diminished. As I understand it there has been no violence
since the end of
2024. Detailed evaluations in 2024 identified his specific difficulties and
needs, and once these started to be
addressed, his demeanour changed, his
psychosis continued to be held at bay, and his rehabilitation into the community
could begin
in earnest. With prolonged planning, day to day support and positive
behaviour reinforcement, he has begun to prepare for the community,
taking ever
more lengthy periods of leave once he was transferred up from Acacia Prison to
BRP in January 2025.
The risk of offending continues to be an issue. He is duly complaint with all
aspects of his order and is readily and positively
engaged with the team
supporting him. Once he was able to achieve independent accommodation, SIL
funding within a NDIS plan, over
time and successful LOAs, his rehabilitation
has continued without largely without issue. Overall, it seems to have been a
story of successful rehabilitation thus far.
opines that the risk of the Respondent committing a non‑serious offence is
very high, less so a serious
In my risk assessment I have set out my conclusions that I think the risk of
[the Respondent] committing a nonserious offence (as
defined by the Act) of
assault is very high, and there is a high probability of this occurring again at
some stage, as has happened
extremely frequently whilst he has been in prison.
I think this risk will remain indefinitely, whether he is in prison or in the
community. The risk assessment using a variety of instruments based on
structured professional judgment, as well as my clinical
opinion indicates that
as things stand, there is a current low level of risk to the community of
further serious offending by [the
Respondent]. I also think that in the optimum
circumstances of ongoing support and graduated and completed rehabilitation into
community from prison, the risk of a serious offence occurring in the future
is also low. The propensity of [the Respondent] to commit
serious offending is
underpinned by his psychosis, his cognitive decline arising from his
schizophrenia, and his alcohol and substance
use disorders (currently in
remission in the controlled environment of his community supervision order in
the community).
identifies two scenarios in which the Respondent could potentially commit a more
I think that the risk of [the Respondent] committing an offence of assault at
some stage whatever order is imposed by the court is
significant: more likely
than not. I am much less certain about a serious assault or a violent offence
that would fall under Schedule
1 of the Act. This could occur on one of two
ways. First, I think the most likely scenario would be that one of his
spontaneous
assaults in response to a fleeting psychotic symptom could get out
of hand. This has occurred before when the attack has not just
been a punch but
been more sustained. On at least one occasion he has inflicted more serious
harm to the victim, causing a head
injury, concussion and compensable injures.
If a weapon was close by it might be used, then the risk of a serious assault
escalate exponentially. The other way is possibly less likely: he might
develop a delusional belief about someone in the community
and act on it in a
similar way to the index offence. I see no indication that this is a serious
risk, but it is one that needs to
be considered. This is more likely where
there is no support, and he has returned to using drugs and alcohol and is not
taking medication.
giving evidence, Dr Petch went into some detail as the impulsive nature of
the Respondent's tendency to
Can you describe what you mean by breakthrough
symptoms?‑‑‑Well, what I mean is – is that the –
taking clozapine on a regular basis, there are still some psychotic
symptoms that occur all the time. Now, most of the time he's
able to tolerate
those symptoms, but sometimes those symptoms are either overwhelming or very
distressing, and they cause unusual
behaviour to occur. And that behaviour may
be assaultive, or it may be impulsive, or it may be on the basis of psychotic
that have already been – have always been there, but due to the
circumstances, for example stress, pressure, any form of upset,
might be more
disturbing to him at that moment. So then that increases the spectre of
impulsive behaviour that perhaps isn't under
his control. So there may not be
an intent to act. So for example, when there have been assaults, my
understanding is that a few
moments prior to the assault, [the Respondent], if I
may call him that, did not know that the assault was coming. It just happened
before there could be any intervention of thought. So it was an impulse, which
is what we mean by impulsive. Had he been able to
interject a thought, it may
have been, "I had better not do this. Maybe there's some other way I can deal
with the situation."
By that time the assault's happened. So it's not knowing
when the assault is going to occur, why it's going to occur, what is driving
that assault, and the inability to read the situation beforehand. And this
part of it arises from a misinterpretation of neutral
events as potentially
hostile. So that's why there's a very great difficulty in predicting exactly
when these assaults are going
to occur. And that has been the case ever since
the index offence, which is why the assaults have happened in – in prison
as well as now in the community a few times.
cross-examination:
[Respondent's Counsel]:
assume from that though that he can make that connection between his mental
health and the risk of violence, wouldn't it?‑‑‑Yes.
hindsight, certainly. The question is whether that connection can be made at the
time. Because the violence as it occurs seems
to be very impulsive and occurs
very quickly without intervening thought between impulse and action. And that
is why I say that
it is at that point that most of us will restrain our impulses
when we have them. You know, a number of times, you might want to
be violent to
somebody, and you stop yourself. And that's the point where the risk lies for
my assessment, the Respondent has made very good progress towards his
rehabilitation, in particular the outcome of living in the
community with a low
risk of offending, on the one hand with community supports appropriate to his
mental health issues and, on the
other, without the support, constraint and
sanctions of the criminal justice system.
as Dr Petch observed, the Respondent's 'mental state is very
precarious'.
In my assessment, if he was to cease his medication or use illicit substances or
alcohol, he would become at high risk of committing
an offence of violence. He
committed many offences of violence whilst in prison, which is a constrained
environment. As Dr Petch
I think that environment has been playing a part in protecting people around
him, and ensuring there's not more serious offending.
my assessment, the risk of more serious harm would increase outside the prison
environment. The prison violence was committed
without the disinhibiting
effects of illicit substances or alcohol. The use of illicit substances or
alcohol increases the risk
of serious harm, both by interfering with the
effectiveness of the clozapine and disinhibition in their own
I accept that the violence in the prison (and in recent times out of
prison) was, in the main, single punch assaults, without weapons.
However, the
Respondent used weapons in the Index Offending and the 2004 offending. The
use of a weapon could readily morph a simple
assault into grievous bloody harm,
a serious offence for the purposes of the CLMI Act. Further, it must be borne
in mind that the
Index Offending included three counts of attempted unlawful
these reasons, I am satisfied, by acceptable and cogent evidence and to a high
degree of probability, that in the absence of
any measures that would provide
adequate protection of the community, there is an unacceptable risk that the
Respondent will commit
a serious offence. The Respondent's current response to
rehabilitation is not yet at the stage for me to conclude that the risk
unacceptable.
Is it necessary to make an ECO to ensure the adequate
protection of the community against that unacceptable risk?
noted at [25] the assessment of necessity must have regard to the other
protective options available under the CLMI Act, in particular
whether the
making of a CSO order provides adequate protection of the community. If it
does, then it will not be
make an ECO to ensure the adequate protection of the community against the
unacceptable risk.
primary difference between an ECO and a CSO is that with an ECO the Respondent
would remain in custody, with the ability to be
released on LOA. As set out at
[100], the terms of the Tribunal LOA Order is that LOA are subject to the
approval of the superintendent
of the regional prison. Ms Secker explained
that the ability to return the Respondent to prison is part of the risk
So in terms of strategies to manage offending behaviours or any adverse
incidents in the community, what powers does Adult Community
Corrections have to
manage any situation that unfolds?‑‑‑I suppose our primary
role in the community, we receive
a lot of our information through the liaison
with the interagency team. In the initial stages of [the Respondent's]
transition into
the community in January and... his community access, it was
acknowledged that if any incidents did occur within the community during
leave of absences, he would be able to return to the prison for a respite period
or to sort of, for risk management purposes,
to mitigate any further risks. With
Adult Corrections, our role would also be to inform the Mental Impairment Review
Tribunal of
any concerns that were happening in the community as quick as
possible as they happened. For example, the incident that happened
August, they were made aware of that incident that occurred. It just allows for
timely risk management should any concerns
arise whilst [the Respondent] is in
the community.
... Ms Secker, can I just
understand something from a practical perspective? So...if there was another
incident of the same type
that occurred in August, am I right... in
understanding that there is a process by which [the Respondent] could be
returned to the
prison immediately?‑‑‑As it stands at the
moment, your Honour, we do have the prison as a sort of fail-safe, I
suppose, in
terms of if there is an incident, and it is determined to be in the best
interest of [the Respondent] and the community,
he can be returned to the
So there is that power that is there?‑‑‑There is, your
... And the decision... in terms of the number of overnight stays and
reducing, then increasing that, who is the operative decision-maker
determining – or the final decision-maker in determining how many nights
Sonny can spend in the community?‑‑‑It
has been largely
determined, so far, your Honour, by the entire interagency team.
... Obviously, we collaborate all the information
that we have from us from
a risk perspective, from all his NDIS providers in terms of... his needs. So
it has really been a collaborative
decision-making process in regard to that so
far... with us being part of that process.
[Applicant's Counsel]:
that, there is the leave of absence order currently in place, which, I suppose,
guides how many nights a week [the Respondent]
can spend in the community; is
that right?‑‑‑Yes.
And am I correct in saying the only person – body that can amend that
leave of absence order is the Mental Impairment Review
Tribunal?‑‑‑Yes. Correct.
So whilst you provide a recommendation to the tribunal in such proceedings as
tribunal review proceedings, ultimately, it's a matter
for the tribunal to
manage the terms of that order and the leave of absence
order?‑‑‑Yes. So as it stands at the
moment, I believe [the
Respondent] is permitted 13 out of 14 nights in a fortnight in the community,
and as has been sort of determined
through the inter-agency team, a staggered
approach to getting him to that level was considered to be the best, to give him
the greatest
chance of a successful reintegration. So at the moment, we've
progressed to where it stands at the moment, but ultimately, the maximum
under the order imposed by the tribunal is 13 out of 14 nights.
Thank you. And yes, what you're saying is that his maximum permitted amount of
nights has not yet been used, but the plan is to
gradually utilise all of that
time; is that right?‑‑‑Correct. Yes.
cross-examination, Ms Secker confirmed that the Tribunal LOA Order
ultimately requires the superintendent of the regional prison
additional leave in the
the current position, which would continue on an ECO, means that the Respondent
is subject to drug and alcohol testing each
time he returns to prison from the
evidence given at the hearing was to the effect that if a CSO were made, the
main differences would be
(a) the Respondent would not be able to go back to prison;
(b) the prison would not be involved in the Inter-agency Group;
(c) responsibility for drug and alcohol testing would pass to ACC; and
(d) the medical side of supporting the Respondent would move to a community
Secker gave evidence that if the Respondent was released on a CSO, she would
still be supervising the Respondent and reporting
to the Tribunal. She also
said that, if so released, Yadah had the ability to take the Respondent on full
the current regime were to continue, the Respondent would be spending part of
his time in the community and part of his time in
prison. If he were
placed on a CSO he would be immediately released to reside in the community. It
is for this reason that Dr Petch
does not recommend a CSO at this
... I understand that under provisions of the extended community supervision
order, he would be released straight away from custody,
and would immediately
reside in the community. His graduated leave of absences carefully tailored to
proceed at his pace to allow
him to slowly acclimatise to the community and
overcome the severe institutionalisation after many years in custody could not
He could no longer be based in the prison. It would be a huge
step for him to take, from no overnight leaves to being in the community
time. At this time I therefore cannot recommend an extended community
supervision order.
This is because [the Respondent] is not yet ready to leave prison entirely, as
his transition is not yet complete. He still spends
significant periods in
prison, such as some of the weekend, and most evenings and nights. It would be
a serious shift if he were
to be released at this stage into total community
living, even with all the supports he has available. I do not think that [the
Respondent] is ready to take this step. I would anticipate rapid clinical
deterioration. Very moderate degrees of stress and disappointment
have triggered
the emergence psychotic symptoms in prison, leading to low level assaults.
Without the containment that he is used
to, even if high levels of community
support is provided, as it would be likely to be, it is not likely to contain
his levels of
anxiety and stress. In these circumstances, the second scenario
described above would be likely to ensue over a short time frame.
reiterated this opinion when giving evidence. He made the point that while the
Inter-agency Group had the capacity to allow
the Respondent to have 13 of
14 nights in the community, to date, they have not chosen to allow him to
I mean, the rehabilitation seems to be going really well. There's a lot of
people involved, and they're taking it as fast as they
can, I think, in good
faith, and they're doing it slowly, because they recognise that degree of stress
and pressure that he has experienced
and he has expressed. If you go too fast
for him, and he's not comfortable, and he feels unsure, and he feels unsafe, as
expressed – like, for example, the first night, and I think
subsequently, he has had to have the light on and somebody around,
and noise, to
mimic him feeling safe within the community of the prison. But if you do it too
fast, the risk is that he will take
a step backwards, and then, the risk may
escalate. So it seemed to me to be sensible to continue going at the rate that
the professionals
who are looking after him day to day feel is safer and
sensible for him, not to have to rush it. The risk as I see it, is that if
was given an extended supervision order today, he couldn't go back to the
prison. So he would go from four days a week to full-time,
which is too big a
step because he is so institutionalised and has been in the prison now for so
long. It would be much better for
him in the long run, in my view, if he just
takes it step by step, goes to five days when people think he is ready, then
seven. And then, he spends 13 out of 14, and maybe for a few months.
Everyone is then happy. And then, he can go on the community
order. And then,
you remove the ability of services to say, hang on, we need to hook you back
into prison where you feel safe, because
of the risk. But I think you would be
almost taking away a security blanket at this stage, if I can put prison like
that, which
I don't usually. For me, I think I couldn't say to the court that
the risks to the community would be low enough to be satisfactory.
I think the
risk may be too high if he is progressed too quickly beyond the speed that he is
happy with. Now, of course, if he
was happy, and the community was happy, and
the people looking after him were happy, he would already be on 13 out of 14,
Just touching on that, you mentioned the safety of the community in returning
him to prison, but is it also because he is familiar
with... the prison
environment?‑‑‑Absolutely.
And at some point, will that change, that he doesn't need that familiar
environment, he can stay in the community and deal
‑ ‑?‑‑‑I would
definitely hope so. And then, his day-to-day support network would move from
within the prison to being in the community. And it is transitioning at
the moment, but it is not quite there yet.
in the converse, Dr Petch is of the opinion that it is necessary to make an
ECO to ensure the protection of the community as
the Respondent is not yet at a
stage in his rehabilitation journey where he is ready to live in the community
agree with this opinion of Dr Petch. It is telling that the
Inter‑agency Group is of the view that the Respondent is only
spend eight nights in the community each fortnight, and not the full
13 nights provided for in the Tribunal LOA Order.
If I were to
make a CSO, allowing the Respondent to be in the community full time,
I would be taking a step which the Inter-agency
Group is not yet prepared
to take. I readily accept that the Inter-agency Group has more expertise in
rehabilitation, and more knowledge
of the Respondent, than I do.
these reasons, I am satisfied that it necessary to make an ECO to ensure the
adequate protection of the community against the
unacceptable risk of the
Respondent committing a serious offence in the future. A CSO would not yet
provide the level of protection
required. The fact that the Respondent assaulted
a prisoner in March 2025 and a support worker in August 2025 makes this
note that pursuant to CLMI Act s 111, the Tribunal LOA Order
continues in effect according to its terms. This will allow the current
rehabilitation process to continue on its very positive trajectory.
reached the conclusion that an ECO is necessary, I do not need to consider
whether a CSO should be made.
to the length of the ECO, I am acutely conscious of the fact that the Respondent
has spent 26 of the last 32 years in custody.
I also accept that the
Respondent is progressing well on his current rehabilitation arrangements.
Dr Petch recommended that the
term of the ECO should be one
However, in my view, it should be for two years. The entrenched nature of the
Respondent's tendency to resort to violence requires
him to spend an extended
period of time utilising his LOA within the framework of an ECO. There will be
a review of the ECO as soon
as practicable after the ECO has been in force for a
An option for the court at that point is to make a
my view, an ECO of two years' duration imposes the least possible restriction on
the freedom of the Respondent consistent with
the protection of the
certify that the preceding paragraph(s) comprise the reasons for decision of the
Supreme Court of Western Australia.
Associate to the Honourable
Justice Gething
4 NOVEMBER 2025
BOM Vol 5, pages 1905 -
BOM Vol 5, pages 2006 -
BOM Vol 5, pages 1928 -
Pursuant to CLMI Act s
CLMI Act s 265(6).
See generally:
General v WAW
[2025] WASC 324
[54] - [60]
[67] - [72],
[74] - [75] (references omitted).
Attorney General v PHB by
his guardian ad litem Alan Van Der Steen
[2025] WASC 312
(references
[211] - [217]
(references omitted)
BOM Vol 5, page
BOM Vol 5, page
BOM Vol 6, pages 2050 -
BOM Vol 1, pages 16 - 17, 223 - 224; BOM Vol 5, page 2023
BOM Vol 1, page
BOM Vol 5, page
BOM Vol 5, pages 1942 -
BOM Vol 5, page
See generally: BOM Vol 1, page 368; BOM Vol 5, pages 1946 -
BOM Vol 1, pages 10 - 15, 258 -
BOM Vol 1, pages 267,
BOM Vol 5, page
BOM Vol 5, page
BOM Vol 5, pages 1924 -
ts 22.10.25, page
BOM Vol 5, page
BOM Vol 5, page
BOM Vol 5, page
BOM Vol 5, page
ts 22.10.25, page
BOM Vol 5, page 1983; also ts 22.10.25, page
ts 22.10.25, page
ts 22.10.25, page
ts 22.10.25, pages 37 -
BOM Vol 5, pages 1994 - 1995; also ts 22.10.25, page
BOM Vol 5, pages 1985 -
BOM Vol 5, pages 1985 -
BOM Vol 6, pages 49,
BOM Vol 1, pages 361 - 378, and in particular page
See for example: BOM Vol 1, pages 366,
BOM Vol 6, pages 2037 -
BOM Vol 6, pages 2045 -
BOM Vol 1, pages 27 -
BOM Vol 5, page
BOM Vol 5, page
BOM Vol 1, pages 273 -
BOM Vol 5, page
BOM Vol 5, page
BOM Vol 5, page
BOM Vol 5, page 2011; ts 22.10.25, page 14.
Vol 6, page 2057 and the most recent plan from 9 October 2025. See generally BOM
Vol 5, page 2013.
BOM Vol 5, page 1906; ts 22.10.25, pages 15 -
BOM Vol 5, pages 1906,
BOM Vol 5, page 1906; ts 22.10.25, pages 15 - 17, 27,
BOM Vol 6, page 2012; ts 22.10.25, pages 26 -
ts 22.10.25, page
BOM Vol 5, page
BOM Vol 5, page
BOM Vol 5, page
BOM Vol 5, page
ts 22.10.25, pages 29 -
ts 22.10.25, pages 44,
BOM Vol 5, page
BOM Vol 5, pages 1907 -
ts 22.10.25, page
BOM Vol 1, pages 1997 -
BOM Vol 1, page
BOM Vol 5, page
ts 22.10.25, pages 38 -
ts 22.10.25, page
ts 22.10.25, page
ts 22.10.25, page
ts 22.10.25, pages 43 -
ts 22.10.25, pages 19 -
ts 22.10.25, page
ts 22.10.25, page
ts 22.10.25, pages 23, 27 - 28, 32 -
ts 22.10.25, pages 29 -
BOM Vol 5, page
ts 22.10.25, pages 41 -
BOM Vol 5, page
CLMI Act s 7(2)(a).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (577 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter