URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WASTR/2004/54.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:09:09
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Croswell & Anor and The Owners of Glaston Court - Strata Plan 6292 [2004] WASTR 54 (25 September 2004)
STRATA TITLES
MR R J KRONBERGER, REFEREE
SEPTEMBER 2004
FINAL ORDER
ST/2004-000067
STRATA PLAN
RANDALL CHARLES
SIMONE NICOLE WILMOTT
“THE OWNERS OF GLASTON COURT – STRATA PLAN 6192”
Catchwords:
Real property
– Strata titles – common property – ceilings – liability
for repair.
Legislation:
Strata Titles Act
Representation:
Applicant :
Respondent :
Solicitors:
Applicant :
Respondent :
referred to in judgment(s):
1 A claim for reimbursement for the costs of repairing a common property
2 The Applicants are Randall Charles Croswell and Simone Nicole Wilmott as the
proprietors of Lot 4 on Strata Plan 6192 ("the Strata
Strata Plan and relevant Act
3 The Strata Plan was registered on 27 July 1978 pursuant to the
Titles Act 1966
("the 1966 Act").
4 In 1985, the 1966 Act was repealed and replaced by the
Strata Titles Act
") which continues to be the relevant Act.
5 In these Reasons, unless otherwise specified, all references to sections and
Schedules are, respectively, references to sections
of and Schedules to the
6 The parcel, known as "Glaston Court" is an 18-lot single-storey residential
development at the corner of Netley Place and Streich
Avenue, Armadale.
7 The address for service of notices on the Strata Company is 3 Netley Place,
8 The lots are in two parallel buildings. There are nine lots in each of the
buildings, but the lot numbers do not consistently
correspond with the
“unit “ numbers respectively allocated to them by the Strata
9 The Applicants' Lot 4, in the southern - most building, is referred to as
10 The Strata Plan shows a number of areas adjacent to the lots. Those areas
are variously described "yard", "porch" and "carport"
but those endorsements
create no legal rights and have no legal effect. The rights to
exclusive use of or special privileges over any part of the common property can
only be established by a by-law of the kind referred
way of a lease that is subject to the requirements of
11 In 2003, the Strata Company adopted a by-law under
referred to below.
Orders sought
12 The Applicants have sought an Order in the following
"An Order under
Strata Titles Act
, for the settlement of a
dispute between the proprietors of Lot 4 and the strata company in relation to
necessary repairs to part
of the common property and for the reimbursement of
$1000 to the proprietors of Lot 4 who undertook these repairs to protect the
occupants of Lot 4. The strata company has failed to perform its functions as
required by the
Strata Titles Act
by not maintaining the ceiling that is part
common property that houses Lot 4 on Strata Plan 6192 to a safe and satisfactory
13 When the Strata Plan was registered, the by-laws of the Strata Company were,
pursuant to s 15(2) of the 1966 Act, the "standard"
by-laws in Part I and II of
the Schedule to that Act.
14 In that Schedule there were 12 by-laws in Part I and 3 in Part II.
15 When the
replaced the 1966 Act, s 42 and the transitional
provisions in Sch 3 specified that, until amended, repealed
or cancelled, the
in Schedule 1 to the
would apply to every strata company.
also added a subsidiary set of by-laws in Sch 2, headed "Optional
Additional By-laws" which a strata company could adopt. Although
Company has not formally adopted the Sch 2 by -laws, the Strata Titles Amendment
Act 1995 specified that unless and until
amended, repealed or added to, the
by-laws in Schs 1 and 2 would be the by-laws of every Strata Company. As a
result, the Strata
Company’s by-laws became, and continue to be, the 15
by-laws in Sch 1 and the 14 by-laws in Sch 2.
16 Notification I667824, noted on the Strata Plan on 21 October 2003, records
the addition of a new by-law 16 to the Strata Company's
Sch 1 by-laws, in the
following terms:
"The proprietor of each lot shown on Strata Plan 6192 shall have exclusive use
of the carport shown as designated in respect of the
proprietor's particular lot
and such proprietor shall have exclusive use of the enclosed yard area at the
rear of each respective
lots and the proprietors of Lots 1 and 10 shall be
entitled also to the exclusive use of the yards adjoining Streich Avenue as
shown on Strata Plan 6192".
This is the s 42(8) by-law referred to
Applicants’
submissions
17 The Applicants purchased their lot on 21 June 2000. They claim that, after
moving in, they noticed some deterioration and cracks
in the lounge and kitchen
ceilings, with those cracks progressively getting worse and the ceilings
beginning to sag from the rafters
as the cracks widened.
18 The Strata Company's managing agents are "The Professionals". The Applicants
state that, at the Strata Company's Annual General
Meeting in August 2003
(“the 2003 AGM”), they brought to the attention of the Strata
Manager the problems with the ceilings,
but they state that no action was taken
to fix the problems as the Strata Company claimed to have no funds for this type
and that, in the Strata Company’s view, it was the responsibility
of the lot proprietors. The Applicants claim that the Minutes
of the 2003 AGM
are incomplete, because these details were not included.
19 The parcel is close to a railway line. According to the Applicants, railway
traffic causes a degree of vibration within their
20 Because of their concerns about the condition of the ceilings, the
Applicants report having contacted 2 renovation specialists
for quotes for
ceiling repairs.
21 Based on the better of those quotes, they engaged RAE Home Improvements
(“RAE”) to repair the ceilings of their lot
22 They advise that, a few weeks afterwards, further cracking appeared and that
on advice from RAE, the Applicants then engaged
the John Massey Group
(“Massey”) who are building - survey consultants. Massey found that
the new ceilings had been incorrectly
fixed. RAE then remedied the problem, at
no extra cost, in accordance with Massey’s recommendations.
23 After further investigations, the Applicants determined that the ceilings
were part of the common property for which the Strata
Company was responsible.
Since February 2004, they have been seeking reimbursement from the Strata
Company for the monies expended
by them on the ceiling works.
Strata Company's response
24 The Strata Company denies that it ever advised the Applicants that the
ceilings were not the Strata Company's responsibility.
It states that before the
Strata Company had an opportunity to consider any action regarding the
Applicants’ request to repair
their ceilings, the Applicants volunteered
to carry out the repairs at their own cost and this is why the Strata Company
further action.
25 The Strata Company points out that the Applicants have not presented any
quotes for the ceiling works and that the amount sought
by the Applicants
exceeds the expenditure restrictions laid down in s 47(1), to be referred
to below, and that
"The Strata was not given an opportunity to consider the work to be undertaken,
the value to be derived from the work or the proposed
contractors and the
ability to carry out the work".
26 The Strata Company asserts that.
"The original ceiling was put up around 1978 and lasted about 24 years. With
improved materials and building standards available,
the repairs should have
lasted more than 'a few weeks'. Must cast doubt on the contractors ability to
carry out ceiling work and
provide reasonable value for
27 The Strata Company refers to the Massey report and states
"At no stage does the Building Surveyor's report state that the ceiling material
needed to be changed. It would appear that the Applicants
have gone to
considerably more expense by having the ceiling material totally
28 The Strata Company refers to some down-lights that were installed by the
Applicants in 2002 and that, in the Strata Company’s
"...as they rely solely on the ceiling for support they must have contributed
to any problems, if not caused the problem
altogether".
29 The Strata Company considers that the Applicants have breached the easement
of support contained in s 11 by fitting the
down-lights.
30 The Strata Company acknowledges that it has not had a reserve fund, because
"The Owners have preferred to cover any capital expenditure on a 'needs' basis
with a special levy".
31 It has advised me that the Applicants have not paid current
levies to the administrative fund.
32 It contends that the only difference between the Applicants’ Lot 4
and 3 other lots between Lot 4 and the railway is the
addition of the down
lights and that:-
"The Strata was not given an opportunity to oversee the costs being incurred and
the Strata believes that it is unreasonable to expect
the other owners in the
complex to contribute to the Applicants' cost of having their ceiling repaired
twice at higher the normal
If the Applicants' request for a $1000 payment is approved (in whole or in part)
it will set a precedent for other owners in the
complex to undertake work on
their unit without consultation with the Strata and regardless of the provisions
Strata Titles Act
and with no constraint on costs incurred".
Applicants’
33 The Applicants claim that, in July 2003, before the 2003 AGM that was held
in August, Mr Croswell, one of the Applicants, provided
the Chairman of the
Strata Company with 2 quotes for the repair of the Applicants’ lot’s
ceilings. They advise that the
Chairman’s response was that it was not the
Strata Company’s problem and that the Strata Company was not responsible
for meeting the cost.
34 In view of that response and because of their concerns about their
ceilings collapsing, Mr Croswell said he would pay for the
35 The Applicants acknowledge that RAE’s work was substandard but stress
that at no time were the new ceilings installed by
RAE removed.
36 They report that the further work involved applying backing and support to
the ceilings that had been installed by RAE, that
no extra cost was incurred in
relation to those works and that there is a 7 year guarantee in respect of those
37 The Applicants also point out that the Massey report’s conclusions
were not that the new ceiling had to be replaced, but
The plasterboard ceiling should be back- block
Screws that have popped due to being too close to the adhesive
should be fixed as per attached sheet.
Extra attention needs to be applied to the fixing system used due
to the extra
movement caused by the proximity to a major road and
41 They report having approached the Chairman of the Strata Company prior to
the Strata Company’
June 2004 meeting (“the 2004 EGM”)
with an offer to pay part of the costs involved in the works. They advise that,
the 2004 EGM, the Strata Company refused to contribute anything towards the
42 They advise that on the day after the 2004 EGM, they discussed the matter
with the Strata Company’s managing agent. The
Applicants’ proposal
was for the Strata Company to contribute $900 towards the invoiced cost of
43 As to the down-lights referred to by the Strata Company, the electrical
contractor who installed them (2 in the dining room
and 3 in the lounge) has
reported that each of the lights weighed only 191 grams and that they replaced
2 double fluorescent tubes.
Considerations
44 The Strata Company is responsible for the repair and maintenance of, and for
any necessary replacement of, all parts of the common
property, including the
ceilings above the lots, regardless of how the damage or deterioration
45 The Applicants may have been at fault in not obtaining the Strata
Company’s approval to install down-lights, but there
is nothing in the
material presented to me that justifies the Strata Company’s view that
those down-lights caused any significant
damage to the ceilings of the
Applicants’ Lot 4 .
In considering my Order, I have also taken into account the Applicants’
action in carrying out the works without first submitting
their quotes to the
Strata Company on a more formal basis before proceeding. Perhaps with a formal
submission to the Strata Company,
supported by appropriate advice from a
competent source, they may have been able to persuade the Strata Company to
carry out the
I have also considered what might have occurred had someone been injured by
a collapsing ceiling All of the proprietors of lots
in the scheme may have been
at risk of having to meet a major damages claim. Even if the Strata Company has
third party insurance
cover, the insurer might be able to dispute liability
under such a policy if the Strata Company was aware of a hazard or risk in
relation to the ceilings and which could have been avoided by complying with its
statutory obligations to repair and maintain the
common property. By having the
works carried out, the Applicants may have helped to relieve the other
proprietors of the risk of
such a claim.
There is an expenditure limit placed on the Strata Company’s Council of
, which, pursuant to reg 29 of The
Strata Titles General
Regulations 1996
, is limited to $50.00 per lot. There are exceptions and
qualifications to that limit in other sub–sections of s 47, but I do
need to refer to them for the purposes of my Order. If compliance with my Order
necessitates the raising of money from the lot
proprietors, the Applicants will
have to contribute their proportion of those funds in proportion to the unit
entitlements of their
Lot 4, as well as paying any arrears of levies due by them
to the Strata Company.
In considering my Order, I have taken into account the offer made by the
Applicants and the expenditure limit imposed by s 47(1).
46 My Order is that
“The Owners of Glaston Court – Strata Plan 6192”(“the
Strata Company”) must by 31 October 2004, or
within 14 days after the
proprietors of Lot 4 on Strata Plan 6192 have paid all moneys properly levied
against them by the Strata
Company, whichever later occurs, pay to the
proprietors of the said Lot 4 the sum of $900.00 in settlement of their claim
for a contribution
towards the cost of repair works to the ceilings of the said
DATED 25 SEPTEMBER 2004
_________________________________
R J KRONBERGER
STRATA TITLES REFEREE
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (64.6 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter