URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WAIRComm/2016/966.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:05:15
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
The Australian Workers' Union, West Australian Branch, Industrial Union of Workers and The Food Preservers' Union of Western Australia Union of Workers -v- (Not applicable) [2016] WAIRComm 966 (23 December 2016)
AMALGAMATION OF THE AUSTRALIAN WORKERS' UNION, WEST AUSTRALIAN
BRANCH, INDUSTRIAL UNION OF WORKERS AND THE FOOD PRESERVERS' UNION
AUSTRALIA UNION OF WORKERS
WESTERN AUSTRALIAN INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COMMISSION
THE HONOURABLE J H SMITH, ACTING PRESIDENT
COMMISSIONER T EMMANUEL
COMMISSIONER D J MATTHEWS
MONDAY, 7 NOVEMBER 2016;
WEDNESDAY, 14 DECEMBER 2016
DELIVERED :
23 DECEMBER 2016
FBM 2 OF 2016
THE AUSTRALIAN WORKERS' UNION, WEST
AUSTRALIAN BRANCH, INDUSTRIAL UNION OF WORKERS
THE FOOD PRESERVERS' UNION OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
UNION OF WORKERS
(NOT APPLICABLE)
Industrial Law (WA) - Application
pursuant to s 72 of the Industrial Relations Act 1979 (WA) - Amalgamation
of two registered employee
organisations - Principles applicable to an
application to intervene considered - Application by federal registered
organisation
to intervene dismissed on grounds of insufficient interest -
Notices of objection filed on behalf of persons not members of the applicants
dismissed on grounds no standing to object - Notices of objection filed on
behalf of members dismissed on grounds not satisfied leave
should be granted to
allow notices out of time - Application complies with the requirements of the
Industrial Relations Act 1979
- Registration of new organisation
Legislation
Industrial Relations Act 1979 (WA) s 6(a),
s 6(c), s 6(e), s 7, s 27(1)(k), pt II div 4,
s 53, s 53(1), s 55, s 55(1), s 55(2), s
s 55(4), s 55(4)(a), s 55(4)(b), s 55(4)(d),
s 55(4)(e), s 55(5), s 56(1), s 58(2), s 59,
s 63(1)(a), s 63(1)(b), s 64A, s
64B, s 64B(1),
s 64C, s 66, s 72, s 72(1), s 72(2), s 72(3),
Industrial Arbitration Act 1912 (WA) s 9(a)
Industrial Arbitration
Act 1979 (WA) s 6
Industrial Relations Commission Regulations 2005 (WA) reg 37,
Fair Work (Registered Organisations) Act 2009
Fair Work Act 2009
Representation:
Mr C Young and Mr M Zoetbrood on
behalf of The Australian Workers' Union, West Australian Branch, Industrial
Union of Workers
Mr D Rafferty (of counsel) and with him Mr P O'Keeffe on
behalf of The Food Preservers' Union of Western Australian Union of Workers
Mr C Fogliani (of counsel) on behalf of Ms A Ristevska,
Mr B Rizzo and Mr G Tupluk
Case(s) referred to in reasons:
Gairns v The Royal Australian Nursing Federation Industrial Union of Workers,
(1989) 69 WAIG 2343
R v Holmes; Ex parte Public Service Association (NSW)
[1977] HCA 70
(1977) 140 CLR 63
Re Ludeke; Ex parte Customs Officers' Association of Australia, Fourth
[1985] HCA 31
(1985) 155 CLR 513
(1985) 13 IR 86
Re The Forest Products, Furnishing and Allied Industries Industrial Union of
Workers, WA
(1990) 70 WAIG 3974
Stacey v Civil Service Association of Western Australia (Inc)
[2007] WAIRC
(2007) 87 WAIG 1229
The Australian Workers' Union, West Australian Branch, Industrial Union of
Workers and The Forest Products, Furnishing and Allied
Industries Industrial
Union of Workers, WA
[2012] WAIRC 00845
(2012) 92 WAIG 1713
Case(s) also cited:
Western Australian Railway Officers' Union and Australian Municipal,
Administrative, Clerical and Services Union of Employees, W.A.
Clerical and
Administrative Branch
[2010] WAIRC 00417
(2010) 90 WAIG 596
Reasons for Decision
FULL BENCH:
Introduction
is an application by The Australian Workers' Union, West Australian Branch,
Industrial Union of Workers (AWUWA) and The Food
Preservers' Union of Western
Australia Union of Workers (FPU) to amalgamate filed on 8 September 2016.
Each organisation is an employee
organisation registered under the
Relations Act 1979
(WA) (the IR Act) and makes application under pt II,
div 4 of the IR Act for the registration of a new organisation pursuant to
72 of the IR Act to be called The Australian Workers' Union, West
Australian Branch, Industrial Union of Workers. As at 12 October
AWUWA had 7,100 members and the FPU 268 members (statutory declaration, Michael
Johannes Zoetbrood, secretary of the AWUWA,
made on 12 October 2016).
application was heard on 7 November 2016. At the conclusion of the hearing
the matter was adjourned for the Full Bench to consider
the matter and deliver
its decision on the basis that the parties had put forward all evidence and
material in support of the application.
However, subsequent to the hearing
15 notices of objection to the application were filed and served on
14 November 2016 which resulted
in the FPU filing two affidavits sworn by
the secretary of the FPU, Peter Francis O'Keeffe, and a further hearing on
14 December
2016 to determine whether:
(a) some of the persons
who signed notices of objection had standing to object; and
(b) the remaining persons who signed notices of objection who were members of
the FPU should be granted leave to object out of time.
the conclusion of the hearing on 14 December 2016, the Full Bench informed
the parties and Mr Fogliani who appeared on behalf of
three of the persons
seeking to object to the application to amalgamate, that the notices of
objection would be dismissed and an
order would be made to authorise the
registration of a new amalgamated organisation.
reasons why the Full Bench made the orders it did at the conclusion of the
hearing of this application are as follows in these
Background - the reasons why the FPU seeks to amalgamate with another
organisation
early 2016, an issue arose whether the members of the committee of management of
the FPU validly held office as an annual general
meeting and elections for
offices (other than the secretary) had not been held in 2015. With the
exception of the secretary, under
r 7 each officer holds office for a
period of 12 months from the conclusion of each annual general meeting. As
a result, Mr O'Keeffe,
as a member of the FPU, brought an application
pursuant to s 66 of the IR Act seeking orders to enable an annual general
of the FPU to be called, an interim committee of management and a
process for elections of office holders to be put in place (PRES
hearing the parties on 18 March 2016, the following interim order was made
in PRES 1 of 2016 on 21 March 2016 ([2016] WAIRC
96 WAIG 310):
6 of the rules of the respondent (the rules of the Union) is varied in that an
Interim Committee of Management is established,
constituted as
Bishir Ahmed
Senior Vice President
Ibrahim Taha
Junior Vice President
Cylynn Criddle
Peter O'Keeffe
Adnan Alsudani
Alene Ayanaw
Dusan Dragosavic
Committee Members
Sarah-Emily Enua
Interim Committee of Management is to remain in place until elections for office
are conducted in accordance with the rules as
varied by orders 3 and 4 of this
11 of the rules is varied in that an Annual General Meeting of the Union is to
be held in accordance with the terms of rule 11
in the month of May
21(1) of the rules is varied in that the notice for nominations for office for
elections to be conducted in accordance with order
3 of this order and the
rules, are required to be displayed in the manner required by the Interim
Committee of Management on a date
not earlier than 24 March 2016.
7(1) of the rules is varied in that following the election for each office
conducted in accordance with orders 3 and 4 of this
order and the rules, each
member of the Committee of Management (other than the Secretary) shall hold
office for a period of approximately
eighteen (18) months, namely from the
conclusion of the Annual General Meeting conducted in May 2016 at which he or
she is declared
duly elected to the conclusion of the next Annual General
Meeting in November 2017, when he or she shall retire from office but shall
eligible for re-election.
Interim Committee of Management shall have the authority to exercise all of the
powers, duties and functions of the Committee
of Management and each of the
members of the Interim Committee of Management shall have the authority to
exercise all of the powers,
duties and functions of the office held by each of
this order is revoked or varied, this order shall cease to have effect at the
commencement of the Annual General Meeting held
in the month of November
be liberty to the parties to apply to vary the terms of this order
to the terms of the order in PRES 1 of 2016, elections were held between
24 March 2016 and 29 April 2016. Mr Ben Harris,
the returning
officer for the FPU elections, after conducting the elections, declared the
results on 5 May 2016 (annexure 2, statutory
declaration of
Mr O'Keeffe).
a letter and attachments written by Mr O'Keeffe, as the secretary of the
FPU, to all members of the FPU dated 17 June 2016, the
following reasons
why the FPU seeks to amalgamate with the AWUWA were put to the
(a) The FPU has been for many years run administratively by
The Shop, Distributive and Allied Employees' Association of Western Australia
(SDAWA) through the operation of a service agreement. Mr O'Keeffe is also
the secretary of the SDAWA.
(b) For some years, the FPU has only had a membership of approximately 250.
They tried for several years unsuccessfully to increase
their membership. The
committee of management formed the view there was little prospect of any
increase in the coming years. As
the FPU for many years has failed to increase
their membership coupled with low numbers resulted in the resources of the union
As of April 2016, the FPU had total membership funds of
(c) The FPU reduced expenses by reducing the secretary's wage from $10,400
per annum to zero and the SDAWA took on more of the cost
of employment of the
FPU organiser, Mr Suliman Ali. This meant that Mr Ali spent more time
working for the SDAWA than for the FPU.
(d) The committee of management formed the view that its only real option for
its viability was to increase membership fees in the
order of 100%, but that was
not likely to be supported by the membership as a whole so that idea was
(e) The other option was to amalgamate with another union. Despite the fact
that the FPU having a close relationship with the SDAWA
over the years, the
committee of management was of the opinion that the rules of the SDAWA do not
permit it to cover members working
in FPU areas of work and so the SDAWA was not
a viable option.
(f) The committee of management authorised Mr O'Keeffe to commence
discussions with the AWUWA to see if they would be open to an amalgamation
to July 2016, there were nine sites at which members of the FPU worked.
However, in July 2016 two workplaces, Smiths and Golden
Egg, closed. These
closures resulted in a loss of about 30 members of the
organisation.
Rules of the proposed amalgamated organisation
rules of the proposed amalgamated organisation, with the exception of the
following rules, are identical to the current registered
rules of the
(a) Rule 4(40) and r 4(41) of the proposed rules set
out, without amendment, the existing eligibility rules of the FPU (r 4
(membership)
and r 3 (interpretation) respectively of the rules of the
(b) The following proviso is added to proposed r 4 which states:
PROVIDED that no person shall be eligible to be a member of the Union unless
they were eligible to be a member of:
The Australian Workers' Union, West Australian Branch, Industrial Union of
The Food Preservers' Union of Western Australia, Union of Workers
As at the date of the amalgamation of the two Unions on
amalgamation]
(c) Rule 36 and r 50 of the current rules of the AWUWA require
publication of notices in The Australian Worker. Rule 36 of the proposed
rules instead requires publication of a notice of a proposed alteration to rules
in The West Australian newspaper. The same requirement
for publication in
r 50 is also proposed.
Eligibility rule for FPU members of the proposed amalgamated
organisation
and r 4(41) of the proposed rules provide:
Subject to sub
clause (41) the Union shall consist of an unlimited number of persons comprising
(a) who are employed in the manufacture, packing, bottling, blending,
refining, pulping, brewing, mixing, the following:- pastry,
confectionery,
biscuits, cakes, cake ornaments, ice, ice cream, grocers' sundries, chemists'
(b) who are engaged in processing by canning, quick-freeze, or other methods
of preservation of poultry, rabbits, game, fruit, vegetables,
fish including
crustaceans and molluscs or any part thereof.
(c) who are employed or usually employed in or in connection with the
handling, candling, grading, packing, pulping, dehydrating,
oiling or by any
other method processing eggs, with the exception of transport workers, worked
engaged in any clerical capacity,
or workers employed in or about warehouses
which do not deal solely in eggs or workers employed in or about retail
(d) who are employed assisting in the production or putting up for sale the
products or wares of factories or establishments manufacturing
and/or dealing
with any of the classes of goods referred to in paragraphs (a), (b) and (c) of
this sub-rule.
(e) provided that such persons are not eligible to join:-
The Australasian Meat Industry Employees' Union Industrial Union of Workers',
Western Australian Branch, Perth.
The Western Australian Bakers', Pastrycooks' and Confectioners' Union of
The Federated Engine Drivers' and Firemens' Union of Workers of Western
Australia, Perth, or any other existing Industrial Union.
(f) who are engaged in packing fruit (other than apples or pears) but only
where that work is done in connection with a process designed
to preserve the
fruit or improve its appearance.
(g) who are engaged in the preparation and packing of edible fungus.
(h) who whether employed in the industry or not are for the time being
officers of the union.
(i) The following persons shall not be eligible for membership of the
Persons employed as production employees in the poultry processing industry
by Inghams Enterprises Pty Ltd situated, as at 14 September
2000, in Baden
Street and Powell Street, Osborne Park or at such other location or locations at
which the said enterprise at Osborne
Park may subsequently be carried out. In
this paragraph, Inghams Enterprises Pty Ltd includes its successors, assignees,
transmittees
or any purchaser of the whole or any part of its business.
In sub-rule (40) each of the following terms shall have the respective
meaning hereby assigned to it -
'Grocers' Sundries', means and includes cereal and farinaceous foods, tea,
coffee and/or chicory essence, coffee chicory, cocoa, honey,
jams, selfraising
flour, salt, starch, bird seed, matches, sauces, vinegar, pickles, chutneys,
rice, sago, tapioca, macaroni, vermicelli,
spaghetti, mustard, spices, herbs,
condiments, peppers, soups, fish, and fish pastes, Italian paste, flavouring and
colouring essences,
peel, preserved fruits, dried fruits, health salines, nuts
and nut foods and products, edible oils, margarine, eggs, baking powder,
powder, blanc mange powder, jelly or jelly crystals, gelatine, vegetables,
methylated spirits, turpentine, linseed oils,
oils, benzine and polishing
'Polishing Materials' means and includes oils, boot blacking, boot paste,
boot polish, harness dressing, harness compounds, ebonite
shine, stove polish,
metal polish, knife polish, washing blue, moulders' blacking, moulders' plumbago
preparations, grinding charcoal
or coal dust.
'Chemists Sundries' means and includes tartaric acid, citric acid, alum,
bicarbonate of soda, cream of tartar, fruit essences, cordials
as manufactured
by manufacturing chemists, patent medicines, ointments, hair oils, cosmetics,
toilet preparations other than soap,
essential oils and health salines.
PROVIDED that no person shall be eligible to be a member of the Union unless
they were eligible to be a member of:
The Australian Workers' Union, West Australian Branch, Industrial Union of
The Food Preservers' Union of Western Australia, Union of Workers
As at the date of the amalgamation of the two Unions on
amalgamation]
Applications to Intervene
National Union of Workers (NUW), an organisation registered as a federal body
under the provisions of the
Fair Work (Registered Organisations) Act 2009
(Cth) filed an application on 4 November 2016 seeking to object to the
amalgamation. Their grounds of objection were:
the application for amalgamation before the Commission has not been authorised
in accordance with the rules of the Food Preservers'
Union of Western Australia
Union of Workers.
Particulars:
of the rules of the Food Preservers' Union of Western
Australia Union of Workers, the Food Preservers' Union of Western Australia
Union of Workers did not publish a notice in a newspaper that circulates in the
Perth District which indicated that there was going
to be a General Meeting on
28 July 2016 to vote on the changes to the organisation's rules.
of the rules of the Food Preservers' Union of Western Australia Union
of Workers, the General Meeting held on 28 July 2016 did not
quorum of at least ten members.
NUW in its application contends that it is likely to be affected by the
application in the following manner:
The amalgamation of the
Australian Workers' Union, West Australian Branch, Industrial Union of Workers
and the Food Preservers' Union
of Western Australia Union of Workers will most
likely be followed by an application in the Fair Work Commission to merge the
Preservers' Union of Western Australia Union of Workers' eligibility rule
into the eligibility rule of the Australian Workers' Union.
If this happens, it
will likely result in demarcation disputes between the Australian Workers' Union
and the National Union of Workers.
the hearing on 7 November 2016, the NUW, after argument, did not pursue its
application to object but did, however, seek to press
an application to
intervene in the proceedings pursuant to s 27(1)(k) of the IR Act. Only
members of the applicants are permitted
pursuant to s 55(4) of the IR Act
to object to an application made under s 72 of the IR Act to amalgamate two
or more registered
organisations:
Re The Forest Products, Furnishing and
Allied Industries Industrial Union of Workers, WA
(1990) 70 WAIG
Section 27(1)(k)
Except as otherwise provided in this Act, the Commission
may, in relation to any matter before it —
(k) permit the intervention, on such terms as it thinks fit, of any person
who, in the opinion of the Commission has a sufficient
interest in the matter;
hearing from counsel for the NUW and the parties, the Full Bench informed
counsel for the NUW and the parties that the NUW's
application would be
dismissed as it was not satisfied the NUW had a sufficient interest in the
matter. The reasons why we made
this decision were as follows.
principles for the Commission to consider when determining whether to exercise
its discretion to allow a person to intervene in
proceedings pursuant to its
power to do so under s 27(1)(k) of the IR Act, in particular the
determination whether a person has,
in the opinion of the Commission, a
sufficient interest in a matter that that person should be heard, were
considered by Sharkey
Gairns v The Royal Australian Nursing
Federation Industrial Union of Workers, Perth
(1989) 69 WAIG 2343.
the substantive application was an application brought
before the President's original jurisdiction under s 66 of the IR Act for
an interpretation of union rules. The federal nursing union, the Australian
Nursing Federation, sought intervention in the proceedings.
So, too, did
federal and state Academic Unions. President Sharkey found that the most
to intervention was set out in
Re Ludeke; Ex parte Customs Officers' Association of Australia, Fourth
[1985] HCA 31
(1985) 155 CLR 513
, the matter before the High Court was an application by the
Customs Officers' Association of Australia, Fourth Division to make absolute
order nisi for a prerogative writ to quash an order made by Justice Ludeke
that leave be granted to the Administrative and Clerical
Officers' Association,
Australian Government Employment (ACOA) to intervene in the matter subject to
limitation on certain questions
it raised in its submissions in a demarcation
dispute between that union and the ACOA. Chief Justice Gibbs at (519) -
(520), with
whom Dawson J agreed, observed:
The critical
question is whether the prosecutor will be denied natural justice if it is
allowed to intervene in ACOA's application
only to the limited extent allowed by
Ludeke J. It may be said immediately that it is clear that notwithstanding the
wide discretion
in matters of procedure given to the Commission by s. 40(1) of
the Act, the Commission is bound to observe the rules of natural justice:
Reg. v. Commonwealth Conciliation and Arbitration Commission
Angliss Group
((1969) 122 C.L.R. 546, at p. 552);
Reg. v. Moore; Ex parte
[1977] HCA 58
140 C.L.R. 92
, at pp. 101-102);
Reg. v. Isaac; Ex
parte State Electricity Commission (Vict.)
[1978] HCA 33
140 C.L.R. 615
p. 620). That means that a person whose rights will be directly affected by
an order made by the Commission must be given a full
and fair opportunity to be
heard before the order is made. That requirement will not necessarily be
satisfied if the Commission relies
only on the fact that the person concerned
has been heard on the same question by the same member of the Commission on a
occasion. In general, the rules of natural justice are not satisfied
unless the opportunity to be heard is afforded in the proceeding
in question,
although the fact that there had been an earlier hearing would be relevant in
determining what constituted a full opportunity
to be heard. However, natural
justice does not require that everyone who may suffer some detriment as an
indirect result of an order
of the Commission is entitled to be heard before the
order is made. Orders made by the Commission may affect many members of the
community who are not parties to the proceedings in question but that does not
mean that any member of the community who will be
indirectly affected by an
order of the Commission has a right to be heard in those proceedings. It has
been held that a person who
is not a party to a dispute, but who may
nevertheless be affected, indirectly and consequentially, by an order made in
of the dispute is not entitled to be heard before the matter is
determined:
Reg. v. Moore; Ex parte Victoria; Reg. v. Isaac; Ex parte State
Electricity Commission (Vict.).
these observations of Gibbs CJ in
, the following
principles emerge:
(a) Every person whose rights will be directly
affected by an order must be given a full and fair opportunity to be heard;
(b) The principles of natural justice do not require that everyone who may
suffer a detriment as an indirect result of an order or
who is indirectly
affected is entitled to be heard before the order is made.
made similar observations. He observed that an
interest which in its nature is inadequate to support intervention in legal
proceedings
in a court may be sufficient to support intervention in a matter of
industrial arbitration before the Commission (523). His Honour
found that if an
organisation has a substantial interest sufficient to sustain an application to
the court for prohibition then,
generally speaking, it is desirable that the
Commission should recognise that interest, subject to discretionary
considerations,
as a basis for intervention (525). In making this observation,
his Honour had regard to the decision in
R v Holmes; Ex parte Public
Service Association (NSW)
[1977] HCA 70
(1977) 140 CLR 63
where it was found that where the prosecutor had relevant coverage under its
eligibility rule there could be no doubt that it had
a substantial interest
sufficient to sustain its intervention and that a lack of coverage would result
in the prosecutor's interest
being much more tenuous (525). Justice Mason
also said (527):
Indeed, the principal
object of intervention is to ensure that all interested parties will participate
in a single resolution of a
controversy instead of being relegated to a
resolution of the controversy in several proceedings. It is the attainment of
this object
that justifies intrusion into the litigant's right or interest in
pursuing his proceedings as he chooses to constitute them.
Brennan said that he generally agreed with the judgment of the Chief Justice.
His Honour then went on to add that in determining
whether a repository of a
statutory power is bound to hear a person who is not directly involved in
proceedings regard must be had
to all the circumstances of
the case, including the language of the statute, the nature of the power and of
the body in which the
power is reposed, the nature of the proceedings, the
procedural rules that govern the proceedings (especially any provision for
intervention
by a person not directly involved in them), the interests which are
likely to be affected, directly or indirectly, by the exercise
of the power and
the stage the proceedings have reached when the repository of the power learns
of those interests. Generally speaking,
a decision that will affect adversely a
person's legal rights or his proprietary or financial interests or his
reputation ought not
to be taken without first giving him an opportunity to be
heard provided such an opportunity can be reasonably given
(F.A.I. Insurances
Ltd. v. Winneke
[1982] HCA 26
151 C.L.R. 342
, at pp. 411-412)), even if that
person is not directly involved in the proceedings which lead to the making of
the decision: cf.
Reg. v. Town and Country Planning Commissioner; Ex parte
([1970] Tas. S.R. 154, at pp. 182-187;
[1970] TASStRp 13
24 L.G.R.A. 108
pp. 137-141). But that is not an absolute rule.
NUW argued that it has three interests which, when considered, form a proper
basis for the Full Bench to find the NUW has a sufficient
interest to be granted
leave to intervene in this application. These are:
amalgamation application is granted it is likely to result in a demarcation
dispute between the NUW and the federally registered
body of The Australian
Workers' Union (AWU). The NUW points out that all employees who are covered by
the FPU are all employed by
constitutional corporations, that is national system
employers. Whilst it concedes that it has no state registered counterpart body,
its concern is that the new amalgamated body will try to expand its coverage of
food manufacturing industry employees into the coverage
of the NUW.
Rule 4(1)(e) of the eligibility for membership rule of the FPU provides
that persons engaged in the industries named
in the eligibility for membership
rule, r 4, are excluded from membership if those persons are eligible to
join any other existing
industrial union. The NUW argues that the words
'existing industrial union' should be interpreted to apply to both federally
unions and state unions. It also points out that the FPU is a
transitionally registered organisation under the provisions of the
(Registered Organisations) Act
. The NUW says that whilst no demarcation
issues have arisen at the workplaces of the employees who are covered by the FPU
NUW, they will arise in the future, as statements have been made that
once the amalgamation goes forward the new organisation intends
aggressively into the food manufacturing industry by the AWU subsequently
seeking to change its eligibility rules under the
Fair Work (Registered
Organisations) Act
(b) The second issue the NUW raises is that, if this application is granted,
it will lead to further litigation which raises a financial
interest. In
particular, if the AWU seeks to incorporate the new eligibility rules created by
the amalgamated association into its
federal rules the NUW is likely to object
and this will incur it costs as it will seek to argue that the provisions of the
were not complied with on grounds that the application to amalgamate was
not authorised by the rules of FPU. It also says it may
seek judicial review of
the decision of the Full Bench.
(c) The third issue the NUW raises is that it claims that its reputation has
been disparaged by the FPU at the annual general meeting
of the FPU held on
27 May 2016 and at a general meeting held on 28 July 2016. In support
of its arguments, the NUW relies upon the
following statements set out in:
(i) The FPU minutes of the annual general meeting held on 27 May 2016
which record:
The President then called for general business. D. Dragocevic queried
the choice of the AWU as the amalgamation partner. The Secretary
explained that
the SDA was not an option due to coverage issues. The NUW is based in Melbourne,
does not have a significant presence
in WA and may well vacate the state in the
near future. The other option, being the AMWU, is facing a membership crisis of
due to the collapse of the vehicle industry and was itself in
amalgamation talks with other Unions.
(ii) The FPU minutes of the general meeting held on 28 July 2016 which
The Secretary advised that, as per the correspondence he had previously sent
to all members, the Committee of Management had, after
much deliberation,
determined that the FPU should consider an amalgamation with the AWU. The
Secretary explained that the Committee
had considered two other possible
amalgamation options, being the AMWU and the NUW. In both cases, there were
issues particular to
the Western Australian operations of those Unions that
suggested to the Committee that the AWU would be a more secure option in the
medium to long term.
NUW also put an argument that in construing the power of the Full Bench to
permit intervention under s 27(1)(k) of the IR Act,
it should have regard
to the principal objects of the IR Act, in particular s 6(a), s 6(c)
and s 6(e) which provide:
The principal objects of this Act
(a) to promote goodwill in industry and in enterprises within industry;
(c) to provide means for preventing and settling industrial disputes not
resolved by amicable agreement, including threatened, impending
and probable
industrial disputes, with the maximum of expedition and the minimum of legal
form and technicality; and
(e) to encourage the formation of representative organisations of employers
and employees and their registration under this Act and
to discourage, so far as
practicable, overlapping of eligibility for membership of such organisations;
Consideration of application made by the NUW to intervene
our opinion, reliance upon the principal object in s 6(e) of the IR Act
does not assist the NUW's argument as this object, insofar
as it refers to
organisations, only applies to organisations which are registered under the IR
Act. This is clear from the definition
of the word 'organisation' in s 7
of the IR Act which defines an organisation to mean an organisation registered
under div 4 of pt
II of the IR Act. As the NUW is not an organisation
registered pursuant to the provisions of the IR Act, the Full Bench has no
to deal with any demarcation dispute that may arise between the NUW and
the AWU as they are both federal unions.
any event, the NUW has constitutional coverage in the federal system under the
provisions of the
Fair Work Act 2009
(Cth) and the
(Registered Organisations) Act
of all members and persons who are eligible
to be members of the FPU. However, it has no ability to provide any assistance
members or persons eligible to be members of the FPU under the provisions
of the IR Act as it has no state counterpart body or any
other state registered
organisation that it is affiliated with, or has an administrative arrangement
with, in Western Australia.
Further, at law, the potential for demarcation
could arise, in any event, at any time between the NUW and the FPU.
the event of this application being granted, all that will occur is that the
current eligibility for membership of the FPU, as
reflected in r 3 and
r 4 of the FPU rules, will be incorporated without amendment into the rules
of the new amalgamated organisation.
Consequently, there will be no change to
the status quo other than a new organisation will have coverage of persons who
were formerly
covered by the rules of the FPU. The only change is that the new
amalgamated organisation, in addition to the coverage of the FPU,
larger organisation which will have constitutional coverage of employees in
other unrelated industries.
are not persuaded by the argument that the proviso in r 4(1)(e) of the
rules of the FPU should be construed to apply to unions
other than state
registered organisations, but even if such a construction is open it would not
assist the NUW in its argument.
Given that this exemption is contained in the
proposed rules of the new amalgamated organisation, even if the exemption can be
to apply to federally registered organisations such as the NUW, would
mean that, if anything, the coverage of these employees could
not take effect at
a federal level, because of the constitutional coverage of the NUW, as
r 4(1)(e) would be construed to exclude
from coverage any person who is
eligible to be a member of any union irrespective of whether the union is
registered as an organisation
under the IR Act or the
Fair Work (Registered
Organisations) Act
any event, the FPU itself is currently registered as a transitionally registered
organisation pursuant to the provisions of the
Fair Work (Registered
Organisations) Act
. Thus, it has federal coverage of persons who are
members of the NUW. In addition, even if the AWU does at some time in the
make an application under the
Fair Work (Registered Organisations)
to vary its rules to mirror the coverage of the new amalgamated
association by incorporating the current r 3 and r 4 of the rules
the FPU, this is a matter, or to use the words of Mason J in
, is a controversy, that only the Fair Work Commission can
resolve. It is not a matter that can be taken into account by the Full
this Commission. In any event, no material has been put before the Full Bench
by the NUW that such an application is contemplated
by the AWU.
to the second issue raised by the NUW that it will seek to run a collateral
attack in the Fair Work Commission on the decision
of the Full Bench to
authorise the registration of a new amalgamated organisation in the event the
AWU seeks to incorporate a new
rule into its federal rules, is not a matter that
is relevant to the determination of this application. Proceedings for an
amalgamation
under s 72 of the IR Act do not involve the exercise of a
discretion, they are administrative proceedings whereby the Full Bench
required to authorise an amalgamation if it is satisfied that the provisions of
the IR Act have been complied with which include
a consideration of whether the
rules of the organisations that seek to amalgamate have been complied with. If
the Full Bench is
not so satisfied, it is not authorised by the IR Act to grant
the application.
to the issue raised in respect of disparagement of the reputation of the NUW, we
are not persuaded that this argument or the statements
made at the annual
general meeting and the general meeting of the FPU raise a sufficient interest
as the NUW can make no application
to this Commission for constitutional
coverage of persons who are members or eligible to be members of the FPU,
because it is not
registered as an organisation under the IR Act. In these
circumstances, it has no right to procedural fairness; that is, it has
to be heard in these proceedings in relation to the statements made by
Mr O'Keeffe at those meetings.
did the NUW have a right to attend the meetings of the FPU. If it wished to do
so it could have organised its own meetings to
discuss with its members the
proposed amalgamation. In these circumstances, even if the statements made at
the meetings could be
regarded as disparagement, the fact that they were made
cannot make a difference to the outcome of these proceedings. As the NUW
constitutional coverage under the IR Act its interest is too tenuous to be
regarded as a sufficient interest.
the NUW made this application at a late stage, in that it did not make an
application to intervene until one business day
before the hearing of this
application, we did not regard this particular issue as material in our
consideration of the merits of
the application to intervene as the application
was made before the commencement of proceedings and it appears that the matters
by the NUW did not take any of the parties by surprise.
also note that the provisions of s 72 of the IR Act do not assist the NUW
as it is clear that it has no right to object to this
application. It is clear
from s 55(4) of the IR Act that only members of the amalgamating
organisations are able to object. In
our opinion, if a person has a valid right
to object and notice of their objection complies with the provisions of the IR
Industrial Relations Commission Regulations 2005
(WA), no leave
is required for that person to be heard. However, an application to intervene
is of a different character. The Commission
has a discretion whether to allow
intervention.
Application by The Automotive, Food, Metals, Engineering, Printing & Kindred
Industries Union of Workers - Western Australian
Branch to be heard
the hearing of the application to amalgamate on 7 November 2016, The
Automotive, Food, Metals, Engineering, Printing & Kindred
Industries Union
of Workers - Western Australian Branch (AFMEPKIU), whose federal counterpart
body is the Australian Manufacturing
Workers Union, sought also to appear in
these proceedings. After some discussion between it and the parties, the Full
advised that the AFMEPKIU had reached an agreement that the new
amalgamated organisation would not seek to extend its coverage of
outside the State of Western Australia.
Notices to object
to the hearing on 7 November 2016, 15 notices of objection were filed
in the Commission. Each of the notices were filed
together. At the same time
the notices of objection were filed, a letter from solicitors,
W G McNally Jones Staff, was also filed
in which it was stated that
the NUW had instructed it to file 15 notices of objection on behalf of
members of the FPU. Each of the
notices contained the same grounds of
objection. The grounds of objection set out in each one of the notices are as
did not know about the General Meeting of the FPU that was held on 28 July 2016.
Contrary to rule 52 of the FPU rules. I did not
see any advertisement in a
newspaper which set out the time, date, location and purpose of the meeting. I
was denied an opportunity
to vote against the amalgamation.
do not want my FPU membership cancelled. I especially do not want to become a
member of the AWU.
The objector is or is likely to be
affected by the application in the following manner, namely:
I am likely to be affected because my membership with the FPU is going to be
cancelled by the amalgamation. I am going to be automatically
transferred into
the newly formed AWU. I do not want my membership at the FPU to end, and I do
not want to join the AWU.
the same day, the FPU filed an affidavit of Mr O'Keeffe made on
14 November 2016. In the affidavit Mr O'Keeffe stated he was served
with each of the notices of objection at about 11.00 am that morning and at
to those in the FPU's
membership records. In his affidavit he set out the following table which was
said to identify the current
membership status of the persons who had signed the
FPU Member No
Membership Status
Date Form 13 signed
Madhieu Akot
36 Eastdene Circle, Nollamara
Vesco Foods
11 November 2016
Andrijana Ristevski [sic]
11 Monash Circle, Marangaroo
Vesco Foods
9 November 2016
Michael Cox
31 Glenbrook Drive, Ballajura
Baiada Poultry
11 November 2016
Nadia (Yosufi)
5A Danby Street, Doubleview
Vesco Foods
9 November 2016
Gabriela Cremanaru
13A Elvire Street, Watermans Bay
Vesco Foods
13 November 2016
Vladimir Medvedev
9/42 Kathleen Avenue, Maylands
Vesco Foods
11 November 2016
Seokyoung Heo
188A Knutsford Avenue, Kewdale
Australian Personnel Global
14 November 2016
James Cotton
15 Copenhagen Street, Baldivis
Australian Personnel Global
14 November 2016
Row deliberately blank
6 Fitzroy Place, Heathridge
Resigned effective 10 August 2016
11 November 2016
49 Brighton Road, Scarborough
Resigned effective 16 December 2013
10 November 2016
Glenn Tupluck [sic]
13 Ravencroft Way, Kelmscott
Resigned effective 10 August 2016
11 November 2016
Stephen Matthews
16 Braithwaite Road, Lockridge
Resigned effective 10 August 2016
11 November 2016
82 Teasel Way, Banksia Grove
Resigned effective 10 August 2016
11 November 2016
Jordan Gontran
4 Trentbridge Ave, Madeley
No record of membership
14 November 2016
Vinh Thanh Nguyen
12 Selloa Place, Mirrabooka
No record of membership
9 November 2016
Mr O'Keeffe
addressed Ms Cremanaru's notice of objection and stated that he had had a
conversation with her in which she had informed
him that she intended to resign
her FPU membership, but as of 14 November 2016 the FPU had not received
Ms Cremanaru's resignation.
15 November 2016, the Full Bench directed the FPU to serve a copy of
Mr O'Keeffe's affidavit sworn on 14 November 2016 on each
objectors. An inquiry was also made of Mr Fogliani of
W G McNally Jones Staff as to whether his firm had any instructions
act for any of the 15 persons who had filed objections.
16 November 2016, a copy of the following letter was sent on behalf of the
Full Bench to each of the persons who had signed notices
The application to amalgamate The Australian Workers'
Union, West Australian Branch, Industrial Union of Workers with The Food
Preservers'
Union of Western Australia Union of Workers was held by the Full
Bench on 7 November 2016.
Your notice of objection was filed in the registry of the Commission on
14 November 2016.
Prior to the Full Bench delivering its decision as to whether the application
should be granted, the members of the Full Bench have
determined that you should
be provided with an opportunity to be heard in respect of the matters stated in
your notice of objection
and the affidavit filed in reply to your objection by
Peter Francis 'Keefe made on 14 November 2016.
The Full Bench has directed that if you wish to be heard, you should advise
these chambers by 4:00 pm next Friday, 25 November 2016.
If you wish to be heard, please advise whether:
(a) you wish to cross-examine Mr O'Keeffe in respect of the contents of
his affidavit; and
(b) you wish to make an oral submission or a submission in writing.
If you or any of the other objectors wish to cross-examine Mr O'Keeffe
or make an oral submission, the Full Bench will re-list the
17 November 2016, Mr Fogliani sent an email to the Commission in which he
stated that he had instructions to act directly for Mr
Ms Ristevska and Mr Rizzo. Mr Fogliani subsequently advised on
17 November 2016 by email that he also had instructions to
act on behalf of
25 November 2016, written submissions were filed by Mr Fogliani on
behalf of Ms Ristevska and Mr Rizzo who sought to object to
amalgamation. In an email attached to the submissions, Mr Fogliani
informed the Commission that he had been unable to obtain
instructions from
Mr Reyes because Mr Reyes is out of the country and will not be returning
for two months.
the submissions, it was submitted on behalf of Ms Ristevska and
Mr Rizzo that a motion to amalgamate with a different organisation
practicality, a vote to repeal the current rules of the organisation and to form
a new organisation. Consequently, they argued
that the strict process which is
set out in r 52 of the FPU rules must be complied with.
of the rules of the FPU provides:
No amendment, repeal or alteration
of these Rules shall be made unless the amendment, repeal or alteration has been
passed and approved
by a vote of the majority of the members of the Union
present in person at a general meeting called for the purpose in the manner
provided by paragraph (a) Section 9 of the Industrial Arbitration Act
1912-1971 as amended.
9(a) of the
Industrial Arbitration Act 1912
(WA) (repealed)
A society shall not make application to be registered as a
union unless and until –
(a) a resolution authorising the application has been passed by a majority of
the members of the society present in person at a general
meeting of the society
specially called for the purpose, of which seven days' previous notice
specifying the time, place and objects
of the meeting has been given, by
publishing a copy of a notice thereof in a newspaper circulating generally in
the district in which
the office of the society is situate and by posting a copy
of the notice in a conspicuous place outside that office;
particular, Ms Ristevska and Mr Rizzo sought to put an argument that
the amalgamation should not be authorised by the Full Bench
as the general
meeting called on 28 July 2016, at which a motion was passed by members of
the FPU to authorise the proposed amalgamation
of the FPU with the AWUWA, was
not called in the manner provided by s 9(a) of the
Arbitration Act 1912
to s 9(a) of the
Industrial Arbitration Act 1912
, Ms Ristevska
and Mr Rizzo say prior to calling a general meeting to vote on the
amalgamation, the FPU had two options:
(a) it could publish a notice
in the local newspaper which set out the time, place and objects of the meeting;
(b) it could make a written request to the Registrar, in the required form,
to use a different method to advertise the meeting.
the FPU did not use either of those methods to advertise the general meeting
that occurred on 28 July 2016, pursuant to s 55(4)(a)
of the IR Act,
it is argued that the Full Bench should refuse to authorise the amalgamation
application.
other response to the letter from the Commission dated 16 November 2016 was
received from or on behalf of any person who signed
a notice of objection.
service of the submissions filed on behalf of Ms Ristevska and
Mr Rizzo, Mr O'Keeffe filed a further affidavit on 25 November
2016. In that affidavit, Mr O'Keeffe stated that:
first affidavit he identified Ms Ristevska as a financial member of the FPU
and Mr Reyes, Mr Rizzo and Mr Tupluk as former
members of the
(b) because Mr Fogliani stated he was instructed to act for
Ms Ristevska, on or about Thursday, 17 November 2016, he made further
inquiries into Ms Ristevska's membership status. As a result of that
inquiry, he determined he was incorrect in his first affidavit
identified Ms Ristevska as a financial member of the FPU;
(c) Ms Ristevska resigned her membership of the FPU on Wednesday,
3 August 2016 and therefore was not a financial member when he affirmed
signed his first affidavit; and
(d) the FPU membership records have now been updated to reflect
Ms Ristevska's 3 August 2016 resignation and that her membership dues
were paid up until the same date.
to Mr O'Keeffe's affidavit made on 25 November 2016 was an email dated
3 August 2016 to the FPU from Ms Ristevska. The email
was sent to the
payroll manager of her employer, Olly Lemmey, the subject is 'Food
Preservers Union deductions, employee # 40302'.
In the email
Ms Ristevska stated, 'This email is to advised [sic] you to please cease
FPU deductions from my wages, effective immediately'.
30 November 2016, an email was sent to Mr Fogliani on behalf of the Full
Bench in which it was stated:
The Full Bench has directed that if
your clients wish to be heard in respect of the matters stated in the further
affidavit of Peter
Francis O'Keeffe made on 25/11/2016, you should advise these
chambers by 4:00 pm on Monday, 5 December 2016.
If any of your clients wish to be heard, please advise whether your clients
wish to cross-examine Mr O'Keeffe in respect of the content
of his further
affidavit; and whether your clients wish to make an oral submission or a
submission in writing.
Fogliani responded by email dated 5 December 2016 and advised that he
wished to cross-examine Mr O'Keeffe on behalf of Ms Ristevska.
14 December 2016, when cross-examined, Mr O'Keeffe gave the following
(a) union contributions were received by the FPU from
Ms Ristevska's employer for the period ending 31 July 2016;
(b) union contributions are forwarded each month for the whole of a month in
arrears by employers on behalf of employees who have
union dues deducted from
(c) the FPU would not become aware that a member has ceased paying union
contributions until at least the middle of the month, or
towards the end of the
month, that follows a month for which union dues have been deducted;
(d) Ms Ristevska's payment for 2016 contributions deducted for July 2016
would not have been forwarded from her employer until the
later third of
September 2016 and if she had made any contributions in August 2016 they
would not have been forwarded to the FPU
until the later third of October
(e) no contributions had been received for Ms Ristevska for any period
subsequent to 31 July 2016.
Standing to object
55(4)(b), when read with s 72 of the IR Act, creates a right of a member of
an organisation to object to the registration
of a new organisation created by
an amalgamation of one or more organisations.
considering the effect of s 64B and s 64C of the IR Act, the Full
Bench found that Ms Ristevska ceased to be a member of the
31 October 2016.
64B provides:
(1) Where —
(a) a period in respect of which a subscription has been paid to an
organisation for a person’s membership of the organisation
(b) no subscription to continue or renew that membership has been paid to the
organisation before, or within 3 months after, that
that membership ends by operation of this subsection at the end of that
3 month period.
(2) Subsection (1) does not apply if the membership has already ended
under section 64A or under the rules of the organisation.
64C provides:
(1) The ways of ending membership of an organisation
set out in sections 64A and 64B are in addition to any ways of ending that
provided for in the rules of the organisation.
(2) The ending of membership of an organisation under section 64A
or 64B has effect despite anything in the rules of the organisation.
effect of s 64B(1) is that a person ceases to be a member three months
after a 'period in respect of which a subscription has
been paid'. The effect
of s 64C is that, any means of ending a person's membership that is not
prescribed by s 64A (by written resignation)
or by s 64B (when
subscriptions are not paid) has effect but that s 64B renders any rule of
an organisation ineffective that deals
with the same subject matter as
s 64A and s 64B.
Ms Ristevska had paid subscriptions for membership of the FPU for the
period of the whole of July 2016, pursuant to s 64B, her
membership ceased
on 31 October 2016 as no subscriptions were received by the FPU on behalf
of Ms Ristevska within three months of
the period ending on 31 July
the evidence given by Mr O'Keeffe established that Ms Ristevska,
Mr Rizzo, Mr Reyes, Mr Tupluk, Mr Matthews, Mr Bryson,
and Mr Nguyen were not members of the FPU at the time each
of their notices to object were signed, filed and served, we found that
each did not have standing to object to the application to amalgamate the FPU
with the AWUWA and each of their notices of objection
Whether leave to extend time to object should be granted to the members who
signed notices of objection out of time
68(4) of the
Industrial Relations Commission Regulations
requires that
any person who objects to the registration of a new amalgamated organisation
must give notice of that objection in the
form of Form 13 within
21 days of the publication of the notice of the application to amalgamate.
However, the Full Bench is empowered
to exempt a person from any procedural
requirement of the
Industrial Relations Commission Regulations
Publication
of the notice occurred in the Western Australian Industrial Gazette on
Wednesday, 28 September 2016:
(2016) 96 WAIG 1384.
Thus, each of the
notices to object were filed out of time as notice of the objections were
required to be given by 19 October 2016.
parties opposed leave being granted to the seven members of the FPU who signed
notices of objection being granted leave to extend
time to object.
Mr Young for the AWUWA pointed out:
(a) despite being afforded
an opportunity by the Full Bench to be heard, including a right to make a
submission in writing, each member
of the FPU who signed a notice of objection
has chosen not to make a submission or to appear in the matter;
(b) nor have any of the members who signed a notice to object made an
application to extend time; and
(c) even if the Full Bench was to make an order granting an extension of time
to all of the seven members, the total number of members
who have sought to
object is less than 5% of the total number of members of the FPU.
it is notable that Mr Fogliani, on behalf of the NUW, requested that leave
be granted to extend time to each of the persons
who signed the notices of
objection, we formed the opinion that it would not grant an extension of time to
any of the seven members
who signed notices of objection and determined we would
make an order to dismiss the notices of objection for the reasons outlined
Statutory requirements for amalgamation
to s 72 of the IR Act, two or more organisations registered under the IR
Act may apply for registration of a new organisation.
Section 72 of the IR
Act provides:
(1) Where 2 or more organisations (in this section
referred to as the amalgamating organisations) apply for the registration of a
new organisation and the rules of the proposed new organisation are such that
the only persons eligible for membership of the new
organisation will be persons
who, if the amalgamating organisations had remained in being, would have been
eligible for membership
of at least one of the amalgamating organisations, the
new organisation may be registered by authority of the Full Bench.
(2) An application under this section shall be made under the respective
seals of the amalgamating organisations and shall be signed
by the secretary and
principal executive officer of each of those organisations.
(3) The provisions of this Division applying to and in relation to the
registration of organisations under section 53(1) or 54(1),
section 55(5), shall apply with such modifications as are necessary, to and
in relation to the registration of an organisation
under this section.
(4) Subsection (1) does not prevent the alteration, pursuant to this
Act, at any time after an organisation has been registered under
this section,
of the rules referred to in that subsection.
(5) On and from the date on which an organisation is registered under this
(a) the registration of each of the amalgamating organisations is cancelled;
(b) all the property, rights, duties, and obligations whatever held by,
vested in, or imposed on each of those organisations shall
be held by, vested
in, or imposed on, as the case may be, the new organisation; and
(c) actions and other proceedings already commenced by or against any of
those organisations may be continued by or against the new
organisation and the
new organisation is substituted for each of those organisations as a party;
(d) actions and other proceedings that could have been brought by or against
any of those organisations may be brought by or against
organisation.
first requirement of s 72 is that the rules of the proposed new
organisation must be such that the only persons eligible for membership
new organisation must be persons who, if each of the amalgamating organisations
had remained in existence, would have been
eligible for membership of at least
one of the amalgamating organisations (s 72(1)).
regard is had to the rules of the proposed new organisation, it is clear that
s 72(1) of the IR Act has been complied with.
It is apparent that proposed
r 4 of the rules of the proposed new organisation replicates r 4 of
the rules of the AWUWA and r 3 and
r 4 of the rules of the FPU.
application complies with s 72(2) of the IR Act because the application is
signed by the president and the secretary of both the
AWUWA and FPU and the
common seals of both organisations are affixed to the application.
to s 72(3) of the IR Act, s 53 relates to the qualifications for and
the basis of registration of organisations of employees.
Section 53(1) of
the IR Act provides that an organisation consisting of not less than 200
employees associated for the purpose of
protecting or furthering the interests
of employees may be registered by authority of the Full Bench. It is clear that
the new amalgamated
organisation will have more than 200 members who are
employees. It is also clear from proposed r 3 that the new organisation is
to be formed for the purpose of protecting or furthering the interests of
than s 55(5) of the IR Act, s 55 applies to applications to
amalgamate. Section 55(1), s 55(2), s 55(3) and s 55(4) of
IR Act provide:
(1) An organisation seeking registration under
section 53 or 54 shall lodge in the office of the
Registrar —
(a) a list of the officers of the organisation with their addresses; and
(b) 3 copies of the rules of the organisation; and
(c) the prescribed form of application.
(2) When the organisation has complied with the requirements of
subsection (1) the Registrar shall publish in the required
(a) a notice of the application; and
(b) a copy of such rules of the organisation as relate to the qualification
of persons for membership of the organisation and, without
limiting the
generality thereof, including any rule by which the area of the State within
which the organisation operates, or intends
to operate, is limited; and
(c) notice that any person who objects to the registration of the
organisation and who, having given notice of that objection within
the time and
in the manner prescribed, satisfies the Full Bench that he has a sufficient
interest in the matter, may appear and be
heard in objection to the
application.
(3) An application under this section shall not be listed for hearing before
the Full Bench until after the expiration of 30 days
from the day on which
the matters referred to in subsection (2) are first published.
(4) Notwithstanding that an organisation complies with section 53(1) or
54(1) or that the Full Bench is satisfied for the purposes
of section 53(2)
or 54(2), the Full Bench shall refuse an application by the organisation under
this section unless it is satisfied
(a) the application has been authorised in accordance with the rules of the
organisation; and
(b) reasonable steps have been taken to adequately inform the
(i) of the intention of the organisation to apply for registration; and
(ii) of the proposed rules of the organisation; and
(iii) that the members or any of them may object to the making of the
application or to those rules or any of them by forwarding a
written objection
to the Registrar,
and having regard to the structure of the organisation and any other relevant
circumstance, the members have been afforded a reasonable
opportunity to make
such an objection; and
(c) in relation to the members of the organisation —
(i) less than 5% have objected to the making of the application or to those
rules or any of them, as the case may be; or
(ii) a majority of the members who voted in a ballot conducted in a manner
approved by the Registrar has authorised or approved the
making of the
application and the proposed rules;
(d) in relation to the alteration of the rules of the organisation, those
rules provide for reasonable notice of any proposed alteration
and reasons
therefor to be given to the members of the organisation and for reasonable
opportunity for the members to object to any
such proposal; and
(e) rules of the organisation relating to elections for
(i) provide that the election shall be by secret ballot; and
(ii) conform with the requirements of section 56(1),
and are such as will ensure, as far as practicable, that no irregularity can
occur in connection with the election.
compliance with s 55(1) of the IR Act, the AWUWA and the FPU made
application in the prescribed form and have filed a list of officers
organisation with their addresses and three copies of the rules.
to s 55(2) of the IR Act, the Registrar published in the Western Australian
Industrial Gazette the notice of the application
and a copy of the rules of the
proposed new organisation as they relate to the qualification of persons for
membership and notice
that any person who wishes to object to the registration
of the organisation and who satisfies the Full Bench that he or she has
sufficient interest in the matter, may appear and be heard in objection to the
application. The notice was published in the gazette
on 28 September 2016
([2016] WAIRC 00761;
(2016) 96 WAIG 1384).
application was listed for hearing on 7 November 2016, which was the date
notified in the gazette. Consequently, as required
by s 55(3) of the IR
Act, the hearing was held after the expiration of 30 days from the date on
which the notice was published.
to s 55(4)(a) of the IR Act, the application is required to be authorised
in accordance with the rules of both organisations.
Evidence of compliance with the rules of the FPU
principles for the approach to the construction of the rules of an organisation
are well established. In
Stacey v Civil Service Association of Western
Australia (Inc)
[2007] WAIRC 00568
(2007) 87 WAIG 1229
, Ritter AP
said [90] - [93]:
Brinsden J with whom Smith J agreed in
Salaried Officers Association of Western Australia (Union of Workers) v The Hon
Minister for Health
(1981) 61 WAIG 616
at 618 said:-
'Generally speaking the correct approach to the interpretation of a union
rule is to interpret it in the same manner as any other
document. It must be
remembered however that union rules are not necessarily drafted by skilled
draftsmen. It is therefore necessary
I think in construing a union rule not to
place too literal adherence to the strict technical meaning of words but to view
broadly in an endeavour to give it a meaning consistent with the
intention of the draftsman of the rule. This approach has been endorsed
relation to awards: see
Geo A. Bond & Co. Ltd. (In Liq.) v McKenzie
(1929) A.R. 499
at 503-4 referred to in
Federal Industrial Law
and Sorrell 5
Ed. at p522. I also said much the
same thing in the unreported decision of
Bradley v The Homes of Peace
1005/1978, judgment delivered 21
December, 1978
at p.13-14.'
These observations have been cited and applied in s66 applications. An
Williams v SDAEAWA
(2005) 85 WAIG 1963.
A similar approach has been adopted by the High Court in the construction of
union eligibility rules. In
Re Anti-Cancer Council of Victoria; Ex Parte
State Public Services Federation
[1992] HCA 53
(1992) 175 CLR 442
at 448, Mason CJ,
Brennan and Gaudron JJ said it 'is well settled that union eligibility rules are
to be interpreted liberally and
according to their ordinary and popular
meaning'. Their Honours cited a number of decisions in support of this
proposition including
The Queen v Isaac; Ex Parte Transport Workers’
[1985] HCA 80
(1985) 159 CLR 323
decision, where Wilson J at 340 said:-
'In construing the eligibility clause in the constitution of an organization,
it is necessary to bear in mind the nature of the instrument
in which the words
appear and the purposes that it is intended to serve. The rule now in question
bears ample indication on its face
that it has been prepared without the
assistance of a skilled draftsman. It has been amended from time to time,
probably in response
to the exigencies attending the industrial affairs of the
union and without regard to the effect of the amendment on the internal
consistency of the clause as a whole. It follows that the words of the rule
should be given a wide meaning and interpreted according
to their ordinary or
popular denotation rather than by reference to some narrow or formal
construction:
Reg. v Cohen; Ex parte Motor Accidents Insurance Board
Reg. v McKenzie; Ex parte Actors and Announcers Equity
. Nevertheless,
notwithstanding this generosity of approach, the meaning of the words remains a
legal question to be determined by
the application of the ordinary rules which
govern the construction of written documents:
Reg. v Aird; Ex parte
Australian Workers' Union; McKenzie
.' (Footnotes omitted)
French J in
Re Election for Office in Transport Workers’ Union of
Australia, Western Australian Branch
[1992] FCA 40
(1992) 40 IR 245
at 253 said that the
'preferred approach to the construction of union rules which requires them to be
construed not technically or
narrowly but broadly and liberally and not
"subjected to the same meticulous scrutiny as a deed carefully prepared by
lawyers."'.
His Honour cited
R v Holmes; Ex Parte Public Service
Association
[1977] HCA 70
(1977) 140 CLR 63
per Gibbs J at 73 and
Re An Election
in the Australian Collieries Staff Association (NSW Branch)
(1990) 26 FCR
per Lockhart J at 502. The reasons of French J were cited with approval by
Mansfield J in
Thomas v Hanson
[2001] FCA 539
. Authorities cited
by the applicant set out a similar method of approach. (
Delron Cleaning Pty
Ltd T/A Delron Hospitality Management
(2004) 84 WAIG 2527
at [40] and
FMWU v GW Smith and KJ Rose
(1988) 68 WAIG 1010.
FPU does not have a rule relating to the amalgamation with another organisation.
Although Mr O'Keeffe in his statutory declaration
made on 7 September
2016 states that the actions were taken by the FPU to effect the proposed
amalgamation in accordance with r 52,
that does not appear to be the case.
In any event, the failure to follow the procedure for the convening of a general
meeting pursuant
to r 52 is, in our view, not material. Whilst the FPU
sought authorisation from its committee of management at a meeting on
2016 and its members at a general meeting held on 28 July 2016,
the FPU was not required by its rules to follow the procedure in
to s 72(3) of the IR Act, the provisions of pt II div 4 apply to
and in relation to the registration of employee organisations
under s 53(1)
and these provisions apply, other than s 55(5), with such modifications as
are necessary to the registration of an
amalgamated organisation. Before
approving an application for amalgamation the members of the Full Bench must be
satisfied that
the conditions for registration set out in s 55(4) of the IR
Act have been complied with.
application for amalgamation of two organisations pursuant to s 72 of the
IR Act is to create a new organisation with its own rules
and is not an
amendment, repeal or alteration of rules of an organisation seeking to
amalgamate with another or other organisations.
An amendment, repeal or
alteration of rules contemplates a change of the rules of an organisation that
continues to exist. However,
on and from the registration of the new
organisation the registration of each amalgamating organisation is cancelled
pursuant to
s 72(5) of the IR Act. It follows therefore, on cancellation,
the rules of each amalgamating organisation cease to exist by operation
absence of a specific rule in the rules of the FPU authorising an amalgamation
does not have the effect that the FPU is prohibited
from making an application
with another organisation or more than one organisation to amalgamate to create
a new organisation. It
is empowered to seek amalgamation with the AWUWA by
operation of s 72 of the IR Act.
Section 55(4)(b)
requires an amalgamating organisation to take reasonable steps to adequately
inform members of the intention to apply
for registration of the new
organisation, the proposed rules of the new organisation and a right to object
to the making of the application
to amalgamate or to object to the rules of the
new organisation. Further, s 55(4)(b) requires that members must be given
a reasonable
opportunity to make such an objection.
set out in these reasons, we are satisfied that the FPU complied with
s 55(4)(b) by taking a number of steps including holding
a general meeting
in compliance with the requirements of r 16 for the holding of general
meetings (other than general meetings convened
pursuant to r 52).
of the FPU provides for the procedure of notification of general meetings.
Rule 16 provides:
Subject as provided in Rule 52 members of the
Union shall be notified of General Meetings, Factory Meetings and Section
Meetings by
notices placed on the Union notice board at places of members'
employment, and by such other similar means as the Committee of Management
deem reasonable. The time, place and purpose of the meeting shall be clearly
indicated in the notice. Seven days notice at least
of the holding of such
meetings shall be given.
to r 18, a quorum for all meetings of the union (except committee of
management meetings) is 10 members.
the statutory declaration made on 7 September 2016, Mr O'Keeffe set
out the facts and circumstances the FPU relies upon in making
this application
to amalgamate the FPU with the AWUWA. Because of the matters raised in the
NUW's notice of objection and an attached
statutory declaration made by an
organiser employed by the NUW, Mr Tim Gunstone of 833 Bourke Street,
Docklands, Victoria, about
what he says occurred at the general meeting of the
FPU on 28 July 2016, Mr O'Keeffe gave oral evidence on oath about what
at that meeting to supplement the evidence which was set out in his
statutory declaration.
Mr O'Keeffe's
written and oral evidence is as follows.
19 May 2016, to effect the proposed amalgamation in accordance with the FPU
rules as varied by the order made in PRES 1 of 2016
on 21 March 2016,
Mr O'Keeffe caused a notice of an annual general meeting to be displayed in
places of members in employment as
required by r 16 of the FPU rules. The
notice stated that in accordance with an order handed down by Smith AP on
21 March 2016,
an annual general meeting of the FPU would be held on
27 May 2016 at 5.30 pm at the Osborne Park Community Centre,
11 Royal Street,
Osborne Park (annexure 3, statutory declaration of
Mr O'Keeffe). When giving oral evidence, Mr O'Keeffe explained that
the notices to the FPU organiser, Mr Ali, and instructed him to
display them at every worksite.
27 May 2016, the annual general meeting was held at the Osborne Park
Community Centre. The minutes of the meeting record that
12 members who attended, including Mr O'Keeffe. Consequently, it is
clear that a quorum was present at the meeting in
accordance with r 18 of
the rules of the FPU. The FPU minutes of the meeting record:
Present: As per attached Attendance List
Meeting opened at 5.30pm
Apologies: None
The Secretary advised that he had been unable to locate the minutes of the
previous AGM.
The Secretary presented a report on 125 new members who had joined the Union
since November 2014. Moved P. O'Keeffe seconded B. Ahmed
that these members be
admitted to the FPU
The Secretary presented his report on the state of the FPU. He advised the
meeting that, due to the precarious financial position
in which the Unions finds
itself, the Committee of Management had resolved to seek amalgamation with the
AWU. This would ensure that
members retained the protection of an appropriately
resourced Union. The next step in the process would be to call a General Meeting
of members to decide the issue. Moved A. Alsudani seconded B. Ahmed that the
Secretary's report be received and adopted.
The President waived his opportunity to present a report.
The Secretary presented the financials as per the attached report. Moved B.
Ahmed seconded A. Alsudani that the financial report be
received and
The Secretary moved that KPMG be appointed as the Union's auditors for the
forthcoming year. Seconded B. Ahmed.
The Secretary advised of the content of the attached Returning Officer's
Report. Moved P.O'Keeffe seconded D. Dragocevic that the
Returning Officer's
Report be received and adopted.
The President then called for general business. D. Dragocevic queried the
choice of the AWU as the amalgamation partner. The Secretary
explained that the
SDA was not an option due to coverage issues. The NUW is based in Melbourne,
does not have a significant presence
in WA and may well vacate the state in the
near future. The other option, being the AMWU, is facing a membership crisis of
due to the collapse of the vehicle industry and was itself in
amalgamation talks with other Unions.
There being no further general business the President declared the meeting
closed at 6.04pm.
Immediately
following the annual general meeting, the committee of management of the FPU
held a meeting. At that meeting the committee
of management resolved to direct
Mr O'Keeffe to call a general meeting of the FPU's membership to consider
the proposed amalgamation.
17 June 2016, Mr O'Keeffe caused a notice of a general meeting to be
prepared for a general meeting to be held on 3 July 2016 at
the Osborne
Park Community Centre to consider the amalgamation with the AWUWA
(annexure 4, statutory declaration of Mr O'Keeffe).
He handed copies
of the notices to Mr Ali and instructed Mr Ali to put them up on all
the notice boards at all of the FPU worksites.
On the same day,
Mr O'Keeffe caused a letter and annexures to be posted to all FPU members.
In the letter Mr O'Keeffe outlined
concerns about the viability of the FPU
and attached a letter dated 7 April 2016 that he had written to the FPU's
auditor about,
among other things, the financial state of the FPU. He also
attached a copy of the notice of general meeting that was proposed to
3 July 2016 and stated that the reason for the general meeting was to
consider the proposed amalgamation with the AWUWA
(annexure 5, statutory
declaration of Mr O'Keeffe).
3 July 2016, the general meeting was unable to be held because insufficient
members attended the meeting to constitute a quorum.
18 July 2016, Mr O'Keeffe caused a further notice of a general meeting to
be displayed in worksites of members. The notice advertised
a general meeting
was to be held on 28 July 2016 at Baiada Steggles, 116 Howe Street,
Osborne Park (annexure 6, statutory declaration
of Mr O'Keeffe).
Again, Mr O'Keeffe handed those notices to Mr Ali to display at each
of the premises where employees of the FPU
work. He also asked Mr Ali to
circulate amongst the members and express to them that this was an important
meeting to attend. The
reason why Mr O'Keeffe decided to hold the general
meeting at the premises of Baiada Steggles is that Baiada Steggles is where the
majority of members of the FPU work. Mr O'Keeffe explained that
approximately 200 members of the FPU are either employed by Baiada
directly or work for contractors at the Baiada Steggles site.
Mr Gunstone's statutory declaration, he made the following statements about
events that were said to have occurred at a meeting
of FPU members on
28 July 2016:
(a) On 28 July 2016 at 2.10 pm, he
attended the Baiada Steggles Osborne site. Upon entering the site, he initially
spoke with five
members of the FPU in and around the lunchroom and kill area and
ascertained that none of those members were aware of a general meeting
conducted by the FPU at 2.30 pm that day.
(b) There were no signs in the lunch area notifying FPU members of such a
(c) At 2.30 pm, Mr Gunstone entered a small meeting room in the
administration area of the site where seven people were present,
O'Keeffe, Mr Michael Zoetbrood, Mr Ali and four people whose
names he did not know that he believed to be FPU members employed at
(d) Mr O'Keeffe asked him to leave, but Mr Gunstone stated that he
would remain until such time as he had an opportunity to speak
proposed amalgamation and answered any queries the employees present might
(e) Mr O'Keeffe stated that the meeting had not started yet, as there
was no quorum.
(f) Mr Gunstone spoke to the employees in the room about the
amalgamation and general poultry issues.
(g) Mr Gunstone left the room at 2.40 pm, at which point the
meeting had still not commenced as there was not a quorum.
(h) Mr Gunstone returned to his car and at 2.50 pm drove past the
Baiada Steggles administration area and noticed that Mr Zoetbrood's
branded car was no longer present.
response to these statements raised in the statutory declaration of
Mr Gunstone, Mr O'Keeffe gave the following
(a) Although Mr Ali had informed him that three
notices of the general meeting had been placed at the Baiada Steggles premises,
did not go into any of the areas where the notices had been placed by
Mr Ali as he went straight to the boardroom of Baiada Steggles
general meeting was to be held.
(b) Mr Gunstone came into the boardroom a minute or two before
2.30 pm with another organiser of the NUW, whose name is Katrina.
point in time the general meeting had not commenced.
(c) Mr Gunstone's statutory declaration only sets out a partial
description of what occurred in the boardroom. Mr Gunstone came into
boardroom, introduced himself and stated he would be staying for the meeting.
Mr O'Keeffe asked Mr Gunstone if he was a member
of the FPU, knowing
full well he was not. Mr O'Keeffe told Mr Gunstone it was an FPU
meeting to discuss the amalgamation and as
a non-member he was not welcome to
attend. Mr Gunstone said in reply that site management had told him that
he had the right to
attend the meeting. Mr Gunstone then said to the
employees present in the boardroom that, 'With this amalgamation going on FPU
would have to think that the officials of this union are either
incompetent or corrupt, or both'. Mr O'Keeffe intervened at that
told Mr Gunstone it was not appropriate to carry on in that fashion and to
leave the meeting.
(e) Mr Gunstone refused to leave the boardroom. Consequently,
Mr O'Keeffe left the boardroom and spoke to the site manager of Baiada
Steggles who informed Mr O'Keeffe that Mr Gunstone had told him he had
been invited to attend the FPU meeting.
(f) Mr O'Keeffe then walked with the site manager to the boardroom with
the intention of taking steps to remove Mr Gunstone from the
(g) As Mr O'Keeffe walked back to the boardroom, Mr Gunstone
emerged from the boardroom and said he was leaving.
(h) Mr Gunstone left the boardroom a minute or two before
(i) Mr O'Keeffe then returned to the boardroom and was informed by the
members who were present at that time that they had told Mr
Gunstone to
leave. At that point in time, there was no quorum as there were only six
members of the FPU present.
(j) After Mr Gunstone left, Mr O'Keeffe spoke to Mr Ali and
asked him to speak to some delegates to invite some more members of the
attend the general meeting. Mr Ali did so and a number of members
subsequently came into the boardroom.
(k) Mr Zoetbrood remained in the boardroom. Once the meeting commenced
Mr Zoetbrood spoke to the members about the amalgamation.
Mr Zoetbrood stepped outside the boardroom whilst the members voted.
Mr Zoetbrood left the premises of Baiada Steggles with Mr
just after 3.00 pm.
(l) Mr Zoetbrood's car did not have AWU branding, it was a plain white
Holden Captiva.
O'Keeffe also gave evidence that once a quorum was present, the general meeting
commenced. The members who were present at the
general meeting signed an
attendance record which is attached to the minutes of the general meeting of the
FPU held on 28 July 2016.
The attendance record records that, together
with Mr O'Keeffe, there were 13 members of the FPU present. Of the
members present
at the general meeting who are employees, one member who
attended is employed at another site owned by Vesco Foods. When
Mr O'Keeffe
returned to the union office he checked the names of the
members who attended the meeting against the membership records of the FPU
ascertained that with the exception of one person all were financial members of
FPU minutes of the 28 July 2016 general meeting record:
In the absence of the President and Vice Presidents, Committee of Management
member D. Dragosevic was invited to chair the
Present: As per attached Attendance Sheet
AWU WA Secretary Mike Zoetbrood was invited to attend to provide a report
from the AWU.
Meeting opened at 2.35pm
Apologies: B. Ahmed, I. Taha, F. Enua
The Chairman invited the Secretary to outline the potential amalgamation of
the FPU with the AWU.
The Secretary advised that, as per the correspondence he had previously sent
to all members, the Committee of Management had, after
much deliberation,
determined that the FPU should consider an amalgamation with the AWU. The
Secretary explained that the Committee
had considered two other possible
amalgamation options, being the AMWU and the NUW. In both cases, there were
issues particular to
the Western Australian operations of those Unions that
suggested to the Committee that the AWU would be a more secure option in the
medium to long term.
The Secretary explained the financial position of the FPU, as outlined in his
previous correspondence. This position was such that
the FPU had no viable
practical options other than amalgamation. The Secretary explained the likely
outcome of the FPU continuing
to operation without an amalgamation, being a
situation of insolvency.
The Chairman then invited AWU Secretary M. Zoetbrood to speak to the meeting.
Mr Zoetbrood outlined the fee structure offered by the
AWU, being no change to
fees until July 2017 and then payment of the concessional fee, currently at $8
per week. He also fielded
questions regarding the AWUs coverage and size.
Mr Zoetbrood then withdrew to allow FPU members to consider the amalgamation
and ask questions of the Secretary.
Following general discussion about the timing of the amalgamation, it was
moved P.O'Keeffe and seconded A. Alsudani that the FPU amalgamate
with the AWU
and the Secretary of the FPU being authorised to do all things necessary to give
effect to such a decision.
CARRIED UNANIMOUSLY
There being no further general business the Chairman declared the meeting
closed at 3.10pm.
motion passed at the general meeting was (annexure 7, statutory declaration
of Mr O'Keeffe):
That the Food Preservers' Union of Western
Australia, Union of Workers (FPU) amalgamate with the Australian Workers' Union,
West Australian
Branch, Industrial Union of Workers and the Secretary of the FPU
be authorised to do all things necessary to effect that amalgamation.
Moved: P.O'Keeffe
Seconded: A. Alsudani
MOTION CARRIED UNANIMOUSLY
Mr O'Keeffe gave oral evidence, he was asked to explain the statements that
he made to the annual general meeting about the NUW,
in particular what did it
mean that the NUW did not have a significant presence in Western Australia.
Mr O'Keeffe said that he explained
to the members at the annual general
meeting that the NUW has one full-time and one part-time official to service its
members. He
also explained to the members that due to the operating practice of
the FPU (which is to pay a fee for administrative services to
the SDAWA), the
FPU members have access to one legal officer, three industrial officers, a
training officer, a workers' compensation
officer, an occupational health safety
officer and other organisers who, apart from Mr Ali, can be accessed if
Mr Ali is not available.
Mr O'Keeffe also said when giving oral
evidence that he explained to the members at the annual general meeting that the
significantly more resources available in Western Australia than the
NUW, including legal officers, organisers and other officers
all based in
Western Australia. He also told the members at the annual general meeting that
the NUW was potentially or possibly
vacating its Western Australian operations
sometime in the future, but he did not further elaborate on this statement.
to the general meeting of the FPU on 28 July 2016, four meetings were held
in about the first week of August 2016 at Baiada
Steggles to discuss the
proposed amalgamation. Approximately 150 members of the FPU collectively
attended these meetings. The four
meetings were all held on the same day.
There were two meetings held during the morning shift and two during the
afternoon shift.
Each one of those meetings were held in paid time.
Mr Zoetbrood from the AWUWA also attended each of those meetings and spoke
the members about the effect of the amalgamation.
15 August 2016, Mr O'Keeffe caused a letter to be posted to all FPU
members which gave members notice of the proposed amalgamation,
access to a copy
of the proposed rules of the amalgamated organisation and informed members of
their right to object to the amalgamation
by writing to the Registrar within
21 days of the date of issue of the notice (annexure 8, statutory
declaration of Mr O'Keeffe).
On the same day, Mr O'Keeffe also caused
a copy of the notice to be displayed on the glass door to the reception of the
FPU's registered
address at Level 5, 25 Barrack Street, Perth.
Ali gave evidence that he is employed as an organiser by the FPU and his role is
to visit all FPU sites. Mr Ali informed the Full
Bench that it is his
usual practice to visit the Baiada Steggles worksite twice a week. His evidence
(a) On 19 May 2016, he was given notices of the annual
general meeting on 27 May 2016 by Mr O'Keeffe to display at each of
the worksites
and he placed notices in the entrance of or inside the lunchrooms
at each of the worksites.
(b) On 17 June 2016, he placed a notice advising members of a general
meeting on 3 July 2016, at all worksites where FPU members work.
(c) On 18 July 2016, he placed notices of the general meeting to be held
on 28 July 2016 at all worksites. At the Baiada Steggles
worksite he put
up three notices, one in the main entrance of the lunchroom, one in the kill
lunchroom and one in the deboning lunchroom.
(d) The notices he placed on the notice boards at Baiada Steggles on
18 July 2016 were still on the notice boards up to three days
general meeting on 28 July 2016 as he saw them when he visited the
regard is had to the evidence of Mr O'Keeffe in his statutory declaration
made on 7 September 2016 and his oral evidence, together
with the oral
evidence of Mr Ali, we are satisfied that the application for amalgamation
has been authorised in accordance with the
provisions of the IR Act.
are satisfied that r 16, when read with s 55(4)(b) of the IR Act, has
been complied with as reasonable steps were taken to adequately
inform members
of the proposal for the amalgamation and provide them with a reasonable
opportunity to object as:
(a) The time, place and purpose of a
general meeting to be held on 28 July 2016 was clearly indicated in a
notice placed on the union
notice board at places of members' employment on
18 July 2016 which was more than seven days prior to the date of the
general meeting.
(b) A letter setting out the proposal to amalgamate the FPU with the AWUWA
and reasons therefor was posted to all FPU members on 17
(c) At the general meeting on 28 July 2016, a motion was passed by a
majority of the members present approving the amalgamation of
the FPU with the
(d) As required by r 18, more than 10 members were present at the
general meeting on 28 July 2016, thus a quorum was constituted when
resolution to amalgamate was passed.
are also satisfied that less than 5% of members of the FPU have objected to the
making of the application to amalgamate. Even
if the Full Bench had not
dismissed the notices to object, when regard is had to the evidence of the
membership status of each of
the persons for whom notices of objection were
filed, it is clear that only 12 of those persons were members of the FPU when
decision was made by the members at the general meeting on 28 July 2016
to approve the amalgamation and at the time the notices were
filed and served
only seven were members. As the FPU had 268 members as at 12 October
2016, 5% of the members of the FPU was 13
Evidence of compliance with the rules of the AWUWA
procedure for amalgamation is prescribed in r 50 of the rules of the AWUWA.
Rule 50 of the rules provides:
(1) The Union may amalgamate
with any other employee organisation provided:
(a) That the provisions of this rule have been adhered to; and
(b) The other amalgamating organisation has approved the proposed
amalgamation in accordance with its rules.
(c) The amalgamated Organisation will retain the name The Australian
Workers’ Union, West Australian Branch, Industrial Union
of Workers.
(2) Where the Union and another organisation propose to amalgamate, the
provisions of this rule shall apply in lieu of Rule 36 –
Alteration of
(3) Any proposed amalgamation requires approval by a majority vote of the
(4) An application for amalgamation shall not be made to the Registrar of
WAIRC unless a notice of the proposed amalgamation is published
Australian Worker which shall be distributed to all financial members.
(5) The notice referred to in subrule (4) shall inform members of the
proposal and the reasons for the proposal and that:
(a) The Union intends to apply to the Registrar of WAIRC for registration of
the amalgamated organisation after the expiration of
21 days from the date of
issue of the issue of The Australian Worker; and
(b) The member may object to the proposed amalgamation by forwarding a
written objection to the Registrar of WAIRC to reach him no
later than 21 days
from the date of the issue of The Australian Worker.
(6) A person holding an office in the Union or in the other amalgamating
organisation may upon the coming into force of the amalgamation
hold an office
in the proposed amalgamated organisation. Provided that no person is to hold an
office in the amalgamated organisation
for more than four (4) years after the
amalgamation takes effect without an election being held in relation to that
to r 50(3), any proposed amalgamation requires approval by a majority vote
of the executive. In a statutory declaration
made by Mr Zoetbrood on
7 September 2016, he states that on 10 June 2016 a meeting of the
AWUWA executive was held in Perth and the
proposed amalgamation was approved
unanimously in accordance with the requirements of r 50(4) [sic].
minutes of the meeting of the AWUWA held on 10 June 2016 record that nine
members of the executive attended the meeting and the
following motion was
carried unanimously:
The Executive approves the proposed
amalgamation between the Australian Workers' Union, West Australian Branch,
Industrial Union of
Workers (AWU) and The Food Preservers' Union of Western
Australia Union of Workers (FPU). The Executive further authorises the Secretary
to take all necessary steps and applications to WAIRC in connection with the
proposed amalgamation.
Moved: C. King
Seconded: B. Gandy
MOTION CARRIED UNANIMOUSLY
to r 22 of the rules of the AWUWA, at meetings of the executive 50% of the
members of the executive shall form a quorum.
Pursuant to r 24 of the
rules, there are 14 officers of the executive. Consequently, it is clear that a
quorum was present at the
meeting of the executive held on 10 June
to the AWUWA taking steps to implement the proposed amalgamation in accordance
with its rules, it too brought an application
under s 66 of the IR Act
seeking waiver of the requirements in r 36 and r 50 of the rules of
the AWUWA which require notices to be
published in 'The Australian Worker'
magazine to inform members of a proposed rule change or amalgamation. The
grounds on which
the application was made was that the union had recently ceased
to publish 'The Australian Worker'. Thus, it was unable to comply
requirements of r 50 in the absence of orders being made by the President
under s 66 of the IR Act (PRES 2 of 2016). After
hearing the parties,
the following order was made on 20 June 2016 in PRES 2 of 2016 ([2016]
WAIRC 00366;
(2016) 96 WAIG 667):
WHEREAS this matter having
come on for a hearing before me on 17 June 2016, and having heard
Mr M Zoetbrood in person and Ms E Douglas
(of counsel) and
Mr B Gandy on behalf of the respondent;
AND WHEREAS having heard that The Australian Workers' Union, West Australian
Branch, Industrial Union of Workers (the AWU) intends
with The Food Preservers'
Union of Western Australia Union of Workers (the Food Preservers' Union) to make
an application to amalgamate
pursuant to s 72 of the
Relations Act 1979
(WA) (the Act) after each organisation has complied with
its respective registered rules for doing so;
AND WHEREAS r 50 – Amalgamation, of the rules of the AWU, requires
a notice to be published in The Australian Worker magazine
to inform members of
a proposed amalgamation;
AND WHEREAS the parties by consent seek the observance of r 50(4) and
r 50(5) be waived and undertake to take reasonable steps to
inform financial members of the proposed amalgamation consistent with
s 55(4) of the Act;
NOW THEREFORE pursuant to the powers conferred by s 66(2) of the Act,
hereby orders that —
with r 50(4) and r 50(5) of the rules of the respondent (the rules of
the AWU) is waived.
50 of the rules of the AWU is varied as follows:
(a) An application
for amalgamation with the Food Preservers' Union shall not be made to the
Registrar of the Western Australian Industrial
Relations Commission unless
notice of the proposed amalgamation is published by:
(i) Emailing all financial members for whom the AWU has a valid email
(ii) Mailing a copy of the notice to all delegates of the AWU with a request
for the notice to be placed on the noticeboard at their
(iii) Posting of the notice on the AWU website.
(iv) The AWU will place a notice in the public notices section of The West
Australian newspaper.
(v) Displaying the notice in a prominent place on the doors of the AWU's
Perth, Bunbury and Kalgoorlie offices.
(b) The notice referred to in order 2(a) of this order shall inform
members of the proposal and the reasons for the proposal and that:
(i) The AWU intends to apply to the Registrar of the Western Australian
Industrial Relations Commission for registration of the amalgamated
organisation
after the expiration of not less than 28 days from the publication of the
notice in The West Australian newspaper.
(ii) The member may object to the proposed amalgamation by forwarding a
written objection to the Registrar of the Western Australian
Relations Commission to reach her no later than 21 days from the
publication of the notice in The West Australian newspaper.
(c) Publication of the notice referred to in order 2(a) of this order is
to be given within seven days of a General Meeting of the
Food Preservers' Union
approving the proposed amalgamation.
application for amalgamation referred to in order 2(a) of this order shall
not be made until at least 28 days from the publication
of the notice in
The West Australian newspaper.
this order is revoked or varied, the order shall cease to have effect on
31 October 2016.
be liberty to the parties to apply to vary the terms of this order.
the conclusion of the general meeting of the FPU on 28 July 2016,
Mr Zoetbrood was advised that the proposal had been endorsed
unanimously by
the FPU general meeting.
required by order 2 of the order made in PRES 2 of 2016 on
20 June 2016, on 1 and 2 August 2016:
(a) the AWUWA
undertook steps to publish the notice of proposed amalgamation setting out the
proposal and the reasons of proposal.
The notice stated as follows (AWU2,
statutory declaration of Mr Zoetbrood made on 7 September 2016):
RE: Proposed AWU - FPU Amalgamation
Dear AWU Delegates and Members
I write to advise you of the proposed amalgamation between The Australian
Workers' Union, West Australian Branch, Industrial Union
of Workers (AWU) and
The Food Preservers' Union of Western Australia Union of Workers (FPU).
The FPU is a small State registered Union of about 270 members. The proposed
amalgamation was approved by a General Meeting of FPU
July 2016 and the AWU Executive on
June 2016. Please note there will be no change to
the AWU structure, fees, organisers and officials or the name of the Union.
An AWU member who objects to this proposed amalgamation may do so in writing
to the Registrar of the WA Industrial Relations Commission
(WAIRC) within 21
days of the date of this notice.
The amalgamated union's rules will be based on the current AWU registered
rules with the addition of the FPU eligibility rules and
minor procedural
amendments to rules 36 and 50. A copy may be viewed on the AWU website
https://wa.awu.net.au/news
or a hardcopy
can be obtained by calling the AWU Perth Office on (08) 9221 1686.
(b) emailed the notice to 2,126 members for whom the AWUWA has a valid email
(c) mailed two copies of the notice to 263 delegates along with a request to
place the second copy on the notice board in their workplace;
(d) posted the notice, including a link to the proposed rules, on the AWU
(e) placed a notice in the public notices of The West Australian newspaper
which was published on 1 August 2016; and
(f) displayed the notice in a prominent place on the doors of the AWUWA
Perth, Kalgoorlie and Bunbury offices.
16 August 2016, the AWUWA mailed a letter to all FPU members. The letter stated
as follows (AW6, statutory declaration of Mr Zoetbrood):
Union, the Food Preservers Union (FPU) has after much careful consideration of
the best future options for Union members, decided
to amalgamate with The
Australian Workers' Union (AWU).
A General meeting of FPU members held on
July 2016 unanimously approved the decision
to amalgamate. If the WA Industrial Relations Commission approves the
amalgamation application
you will automatically become a member of the AWU and
are entitled to all the benefits that the AWU offers. Attached is a summary
the various services and benefits that the AWU offers to members.
The AWU is a large and diverse Union covering many types of workers in a wide
range of industries. It is this rich diversity in backgrounds
and experiences
that makes all of us stronger.
The AWU has offices and organisers based in Perth, Kalgoorlie, Bunbury, Port
Hedland, Karratha, Newman and Onslow always ready to
assist Union members. FPU
members' interests will also continue to be represented at the highest level of
the AWU with a position
on the Union's Executive reserved for the FPU area of
Your current FPU Union dues will remain unchanged until 1 July 2017. The AWU
will then offer membership at the AWU Concessional rate
for all current FPU
members. The concessional rate is currently $8 per week which is tax
deductible.
The amalgamation process will take several months to complete and you will be
kept up to date by both the FPU and AWU. If you have
any questions or concerns
in the meantime please feel free to contact the AWU Office on (08)
application to amalgamate was filed on 8 September 2016, which is more than
28 days after the publication of the notice in The
West Australian
newspaper as required by order 3 of the order made in PRES 2 of 2016
on 20 June 2016.
regard is had to the matters stated in Mr Zoetbrood's statutory declaration
made on 7 September 2016, we are satisfied that the
application for
amalgamation has been authorised in accordance with the rules of the AWUWA (as
varied by the order made on 20 June
2016 in PRES 2 of 2016). In
particular:
(a) As required by r 50(3), the proposed
amalgamation was approved by a majority vote of the executive:
(i) on 10 June 2016 the executive met and unanimously approved the
proposed amalgamation of the AWUWA with the FPU; and
(ii) at the meeting of the executive on 10 June 2016, as required by
r 22 (when read with r 24), a quorum of the executive was present
the motion to approve the amalgamation was passed.
(b) The process for informing the members of the proposed amalgamation and
the reasons therefor by a notice to the members of the
AWUWA was effected in
accordance with the procedure prescribed in r 50 (as varied by the order
made on 20 June 2016).
Satisfied of compliance with the requirements of the IR Act
his statutory declaration made on 7 September 2016, Mr Zoetbrood
states there have been no objections to the resolution to amalgamate
organisations, nor have there been any subsequent objections forwarded to either
of the applicant organisations. The Commission
records also reveal that no
objections to the application to register the proposed amalgamated organisations
or to the proposed rules
of the proposed amalgamated organisation were received
by the Registrar until after the application was heard by the Full Bench on
7 November 2016. On 14 November 2016, 15 notices of objection
were filed.
careful consideration of the evidence and the orders made pursuant to s 66
of the IR Act, we are satisfied, as required by s
55(4) of the IR Act,
(a) the application has been authorised in accordance with the
rules of both organisations; and
(b) reasonable steps have been taken to adequately inform their members:
(i) of the intention of each organisation to apply for registration of the
new organisation;
(ii) of the proposed rules of the new organisation; and
(iii) that the members or any of them have not objected to the making of the
application or to those rules or any of them by forwarding
a written objection
to the Registrar.
are also satisfied as required by s 55(4)(d) of the IR Act, that the rules
of the proposed organisation provide for reasonable
notice of any proposed
alteration and reasons therefor to be given to the members of the organisation
and for reasonable opportunity
for the members to object to any such
of the rules of the proposed organisation provides for the following
(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in these rules,
and subject to the provisions of the
Industrial Relations Act 1979
subsequent amendment thereof, no rule shall be altered or repealed, and no new
rule shall be added except by a majority vote
of the members present in person
at a General Meeting of the Union specially called for the purpose, of which
seven days' previous
notice, specifying the time, place and objects of such
meeting shall have been given.
(2) Notice of such General Meeting shall be given by publication of an
advertisement in a newspaper circulating in the district in
which the head
office of the Union is situated, and by posting a copy of the notice in a
conspicuous place outside the said office.
Fifteen members shall form a quorum
at such meeting. Such alterations, repeals or additions of rules shall be
subject to the requisites
Industrial Relations Act 1979
subsequent amendment thereof, and shall be registered with the Registrar of
(3) An alteration to these Rules shall not be or become effective until the
Registrar of WAIRC has given to the Union a Certificate
that the alteration has
been registered pursuant to the
Industrial Relations Act 1979
(4) No application shall be made to the Registrar of WAIRC for the
registration of any proposed alteration to these Rules unless the
taken reasonable steps to adequately inform financial members of the proposed
alteration and the reasons.
(5) Further to subrule (4), the Union shall also inform the financial members
(i) The union intends to apply to the Registrar of WAIRC for the registration
of the proposed alteration after the expiration of 28
days from the date of the
publication of notice in the West Australian newspaper.
(ii) The members or any of them may object to the proposed alteration by
forwarding written objection to the Registrar of WAIRC to
reach the Registrar no
later than 28 days from the date of the publication of the notice in the
West Australian newspaper.
(6) Where the Union and another organisation propose to amalgamate, the
provisions of Rule 50- Amalgamation shall apply in lieu this
to s 55(4)(e) of the IR Act, the rules of the proposed organisation
relating to elections for office must provide that elections
shall be by secret
ballot and conform with the requirements of s 56(1) of the IR Act, and are
such as will ensure, as far as practicable,
that no irregularity can occur in
connection with the election.
proposed rules of the amalgamated organisation relating to elections are the
same as the current rules of the AWUWA. Compliance
with the provisions of the
IR Act, in respect of the rules of a new organisation, were considered at some
length on the last occasion
the AWUWA amalgamated with another organisation. In
The Australian Workers' Union, West Australian Branch, Industrial Union of
Workers and The Forest Products, Furnishing and Allied
Industries Industrial
Union of Workers, WA
[2012] WAIRC 00845
(2012) 92 WAIG 1713
the current rules of the AWUWA were before the Full Bench in a proposed form.
The current rules were comprehensively reviewed by
the Full Bench and found to
comply with the requirements of the provisions of the IR Act.
this matter, the applicants provided to the Full Bench a document which
summarises each of the rules of the proposed amalgamated
organisation that make
provision for compliance with the provisions of the IR Act in respect of
elections and the duties and functions
of its officers. This document
summarises the following provisions as follows:
for the Election of Office Holders
Rule 31A(8) and
Rule 30(9) provide for elections to be conducted by secret ballot in compliance
with s55(4)(e) and 56(1)(d)(i).
Rule 31(1)(b)(i) ensures that no irregularities can occur in relation to the
election in compliance with s55(4)(e) and 56(1)(d)(iii)
Rules 31(1) and 49(8) provide for the returning officer not to be connected
to the Union in compliance with s56(1)(a).
Rule 31(6) provides for the returning officer to allow candidates to rectify
defective nominations in compliance with s56(1)(b).
Rule 31(17) sets out the method of election of office holders in compliance
with s56(1)(c).
Rule 31(5) makes provision for absent voting in compliance with
s56(1)(d)(ii)(I)
Rule 29 sets out the manner in which persons can become candidates for
Rule 31 set [sic] out the duties and conduct of the returning officer.
Rules 31 and 31A provide for the conduct of the ballot.
Rule 31(8) and (9) provide for the appointment, conduct and duties of
scrutineers.
Rule 31(10) provides for the declaration of the results of ballot by the
returning officer in compliance with s56(1)(d)((ii)(VI)
Rules 24(1) and 30(1) provide for the period of elected positions not
exceeding four years in compliance with s56(1)(e).
Rule 32 provides for the filling of casual vacancies not exceeding the
unexpired part of the term of office in compliance with s56(1)(f).
of Disputes
Rule 44 provides for the settlement of disputes with
members in compliance with s110(1).
Other Provisions for Rules of Organisations
Organisation
Rule 43 provides for a common seal, its custody and
Rule 39 provides for use of the seal for executing agreements, deeds and
instruments.
20 provides for the calling, advertising and business of Annual General, General
and Extraordinary General Meetings.
Meetings of the Executive may be called by the President or Secretary in
accordance with Rules 34(1)(b) and 35(1)(m).
Rules 20(5) and 22 provide for the quorum at meetings.
Rule 23 sets out the voting at meetings.
and Instruments
Rule 39 provides for the making of agreements,
deeds and instruments by the Union.
Representation
38 provides for the representation of the Union.
and Investments
Rule 15 provides for the control of property and
funds by the Executive.
16 provides for the keeping of accounts, balance sheets and audit. The financial
year specified at rule 16(1).
of Accounts
Rules 46 provides for the appointment of auditors to
examine books, balance sheets, receipts and documents at least yearly. Auditors
cannot be members of the Union.
Rule 16(2) provides for audited balance sheets and report to be filed with
WAIRC Registrar within one month of completion of the Auditor's
Rule 10(1) provides for the keeping of correct
register of members in compliance with s63(1)(a).
Rule 10(2) provides for purging of the register of members in compliance with
Rule 35(1)(h) further provides for the Secretary to keep a correct register
of members.
of Office Bearers
Rule 10 provides for the keeping of correct
register of officers in compliance with s63(1)(b).
30(1) and (3) provide the dates and times for the opening and closing of
nominations for elections.
Rule 30(2) provides for the advertising of nominations of candidates for
elections to be advertised.
Rule 31(6) provides the period of time for correcting defective nominations
in accordance with s56(1)(b).
Rule 31A(8) provides the times and dates for opening and closing of ballots.
Rule 31A(9) provides for the closing date to be published
in newspaper or
official Union publication.
Rule 31A(2) provides for the order of candidates names on the ballot paper to
be determined by lot drawn by the returning officer.
Rule 31(17) provides for the voting method for the ballot by placing a
Rule 31A(11) provides the date for successful candidates to take office.
27 sets out the powers and duties of members of the Executive.
Rule 34 sets out the duties and powers of the President and
Vice-Presidents.
Rule 35 sets out the duties and powers of the Secretary and Assistant
3 sets out the objects of the Union.
Dissolution
45 provides for the dissolution of the Union.
6 provides the procedure for application for membership.
Rule 12 provides for the rate of membership dues to be determined under the
The Australian Workers' Union
as registered with the
Work Act 2009
provides the procedure for resignation from the Union.
provides for filling of vacant offices.
are satisfied that the name of the proposed organisation does not contravene
s 59 of the IR Act. Section 59 provides that the
Full Bench shall not
authorise the registration of an organisation under a name identical with that
by which any other organisation
has been registered or which by reason of its
resemblance to the name of another organisation or body or for any other reason
in the opinion of the Full Bench, likely to deceive or mislead any person.
Although the proposed organisation will bear the same
name as the AWUWA, once
registered, the AWUWA in its current form will cease to exist so no issue will
arise about registration of
an organisation under a name that is identical by
which any other organisation has been registered.
to s 63(1)(a) and s 63(1)(b) of the IR Act, an organisation is
required to keep records of the residential address of each
member and each
office holder. Proposed r 10, however, requires the secretary to keep a
register of postal addresses of members
and officers. It is notable that
s 63(1)(a) and s 63(1)(b) are not required by the provisions of the IR
Act to be expressly contained
in the rules of an organisation. Further, if this
rule comes into operation it will not absolve the FPU from complying with
and s 63(1)(b) of the IR Act. However, to ensure
compliance with s 63(1)(a) and s 63(1)(b), a subsequent amendment to
of the new organisation is desirable.
these reasons, we are of the opinion that the Full Bench should authorise the
Registrar to register the new organisation. Pursuant
to s 58(2) of the IR
Act, the Full Bench is empowered to authorise the Registrar to register an
organisation unconditionally or subject
to the compliance by the organisation
with any direction given to it by the Full Bench. However, we are of the
opinion that the
registration should be subject to the compliance by the
organisation with a direction that the following rules be amended to remedy
number of provisions:
(a) Rule 4(40)(e) is identical in terms to
r 4(1)(e) of the rules of the FPU. It provides an exclusion from
membership of not only
persons who are eligible to join any other existing
industrial union, but also persons who are eligible to join the Australasian
Meat Industry Employees' Union Industrial Union of Workers', Western Australian
Branch, Perth; The Western Australian Bakers', Pastrycooks'
and Confectioners'
Union of Workers and The Federated Engine Drivers' and Firemens' Union of
Workers of Western Australia, Perth.
These are all organisations that have
ceased to exist. When the Act was first enacted as the
Arbitration Act 1979
(WA) organisations were referred to as industrial union
or unions. An industrial union or unions was defined in s 6 of that Act
mean an industrial union registered under that Act. The term 'industrial union'
was subsequently amended to 'organisation'.
Consequently, we are of the opinion
that r 4(40)(e) should be updated to delete the words in r 4(40)(e)
and substitute the following
words, 'PROVIDED such persons are not eligible to
join any other existing organisation registered under the
Relations Act 1979
(b) Rule 10(1) of the proposed rules of the amalgamated organisation should
be amended by deleting the word 'postal' that appears
twice and substitute the
word 'residential', or alternatively by adding after the word 'postal' that
appears twice the words 'and
residential'.
(c) Rule 12 of the proposed rules of the amalgamated organisation refers
to the rules of the Australian Workers' Union as registered
with Fair Work
Australia. This provision should be updated to delete the word 'Australia' and
substitute the word 'Commission'.
(d) Rule 19 should be amended by deleting the words 'BY Order No 2198 of
1997 of the 15 December 1997'.
(e) Rule 26(11) should be amended by deleting the word 'Arbitration Act,' and
substitute the word 'Relations Act'.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter