URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WASAT/2025/117.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:06:56
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
OTR 208 PTY LTD and CITY OF VINCENT [2025] WASAT 117 (24 October 2025)
STATE ADMINISTRATIVE
PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT ACT 2005
OTR 208 PTY LTD and CITY OF VINCENT
[2025] WASAT 117
JUDGE H JACKSON, DEPUTY PRESIDENT
22 JULY 2025
DELIVERED :
24 OCTOBER 2025
FILE NO/S :
DR 138 of 2024
OTR 208 PTY LTD
CITY OF VINCENT
Development and resources - Planning - Refusal
of application for development approval - Preliminary legal questions - Existing
rights - Non-conforming use rights - Discontinuance - Nature of test -
Whether discontinuance occurs upon cessation of activities
- Whether subjective
intention is relevant to discontinuance - Whether approval is required for
proposed works - Whether works fall
within relevant exceptions from requirement
for approval
Legislation:
Local Government Act 1919
Planning and Development (Local Planning Schemes) Regulations 2015
(WA), Sch 2, cl 1, cl 60, cl 61
Planning and Development Act 2005
City of Vincent Local Planning Scheme No.
, cl 18(2), cl 22, cl 22(1), cl 22(1)(a), cl 22(1)(b), cl 22(2), cl
22(2)(a), cl 22(2)(b), cl 23
Town of Vincent Town Planning Scheme No.
The land at 41 - 43 Angove Street, North Perth has
the benefit of non-conforming use rights for use as a service station
proposed works the subject of the application require development approval
Representation:
Ms R Young SC and Ms I Mosole
Mr K De Kerloy SC and Mr C Slarke
Solicitors:
Case(s) referred to in decision(s):
Aquatic Airways Pty Ltd v Warringah Shire Council
(1990) 71 LGRA 10
Auburn Council v Nehme
[1999] NSWCA 383
(1999) 106 LGERA 19
Calvary Health Care Tasmania Inc v Hobart City Council
[2006] TASSC 10
(2006) 15 Tas R 271
144 LGERA 107
City of Gosnells v Reid
[2024] WASCA 155
Ex parte New Gamble Brickworks Pty Ltd
[1963] VicRp 92
(1962) 9 LGRA 258
Gull Petroleum (WA) Pty Ltd v Nashville Investments Pty Ltd
[1999] WASCA 12
(1999) 102 LGERA
House of Peace v Bankstown CC
[2000] NSWCA 44
(2000) 48 NSWLR 498
Hudak v Waverley MC
(1990) 70 LGRA 130
Hunter Industrial Rental Equipment Pty Ltd v Dungog Shire Council
(2019) 101 NSWLR 1
Interslice Pty Ltd v CCA Investments - Bass Hill Pty Ltd
[2025] NSWCA 175
Lederer v Sydney City Council
[2001] NSWLEC 272
(2001) 119 LGERA 350
Leeming v Port Adelaide CC [No 2]
(1987) 62 LGRA 277
Nancy Shetland Pty Ltd v Melbourne and Metropolitan Board of Works
(1974) 48 ALJR 448
34 LGRA 151
OMSB Pty Ltd and Shire of Ashburton
[2025] WASAT 24
Park Street Properties v South Melbourne City Council
[1990] VicRp 48
[1990] VR 545
Pioneer Aggregates (UK) Ltd v Secretary of State for the Environment
[1985] 1 AC 132
Pioneer Concrete (Qld) Pty Ltd v Brisbane City Council
(1980) 145 CLR 485; (1980) 44 LGRA 346
Point Grey Development Company Pty Ltd and Shire of Murray
[2019] WASAT 106
Rosenblum v Brisbane CC
[1957] HCA 98
(1957) 98 CLR 35
Shire of Murray v IVO Nominees Pty Ltd
[2020] WASCA 45
(2020) 243 LGERA
Smargiassi Nominees Pty Ltd v Shire of Collie
[2024] WASC 16
Sorrento Apartments Pty Ltd v Mornington Peninsula Shire Council
[2001] VSC 302
(2001) 117 LGERA 43
Stewart and Town of Cottesloe
[2019] WASAT 100
University of Western Australia v City of Subiaco
[1980] WASC 28
(1980) 52 LGRA 360
Warr and Town of Cambridge
[2020] WASAT 126
Woolahra MC v TAJJ Investments Pty Ltd
(1982) 49 LGRA 123
Woollahra Municipal Council v Banool Developments Pty Ltd
[1973] HCA 65
(1973) 129 CLR 138
FOR DECISION OF THE TRIBUNAL
Introduction
) was used as
a service station.
2002, development approval was granted which changed the approved use of the
Land to 'service station and vehicle sales premises'
May 2018, the planning scheme under which the 2002 DA had been granted was
revoked and replaced with another scheme. However,
the use of the Land as a
service station and for vehicle sales remained one for which approval could be
applicant (
) purchased the Land in late 2021, shut down the service
station and fenced the Land, which has remained securely fenced ever since.
August 2023, OTR applied for development approval to carry out works on the Land
in order, it says, to facilitate the reopening
of the service station.
February 2024, the new scheme was amended so as to prohibit the use of the Land
as a service station.
August 2024, OTR's application was refused on grounds which included that the
Land lacks non-conforming use rights for use as
a service station.
has applied for review of that refusal. Two preliminary questions have been
formulated as follows:
(a) Issue 1: Does the [Land] have the benefit of existing use rights or
non-conforming use rights for use as a 'service station'?
(b) Issue 2: If the answer to Issue 1 is yes, is clause 23 of the
City of Vincent Local Planning Scheme No. 2
engaged or is
clause 60 of Schedule 2 of the
Planning and Development
(Local Planning Schemes) Regulations 2015
(WA) engaged, such that
development approval is required?
the reasons that follow, both questions are answered 'Yes'.
Accordingly,
the matter should be programmed through to a hearing on the merits of the
proposed works.
noted above, the Land is located at 41 - 43 Angove Street, North Perth, on
the corner of Woodville Street. It is more accurately
described as Lot 701
on Deposited Plan 302447 and Lot 18 on Plan 1874.
Land contains a building and other improvements which are consistent with its
previous operation as a service station and motor
vehicle sales yard.
building faces north (toward Angove Street) and opens (by way of roller
doors and windows) onto a paved/bituminised forecourt,
which is partly covered
with a canopy, under which are three petrol bowsers and a kerosene bowser. The
main building's rear (southern
wall), within which is a window, backs onto a
lane/right of way and its eastern boundary opens by way of a roller door onto
the footpath
of Woodville Street.
the west of the Land is another property at 45 Angove Street (Lots 700 and
Adjacent Lot
). Against the western boundary of the Land is an area
marked for the parking of five vehicles.
Pre-2002 Historical Planning Facts
to written submissions filed on behalf of the respondent (
Respondent's
Submissions
) was a Schedule of 'Admitted Facts'. The following is
taken from, and largely repeats, paras 5 to 9 of that
(a) Until the establishment of the Town of Vincent on 1
July 1994, the Land was located within the City of Perth.
(b) Aerial photographs indicate that the main building on the Land has been
present since 1953.
(c) The respondent's records indicate that the Land was used as a service
station from about 1967.
(d) The City of Perth Zoning By-Law 64 (
) was operative at the
time the service station use commenced. ZBL 64 provided, relevantly, that a
Class C5 land use could commence
on the Land without obtaining planning
approval. The Class C5 land use was defined as '[m]otor repairing and servicing
shops including
retailing of automotive fuels, lubricants and accessories'.
(e) On 19 October 1992, the City of Perth granted approval to modify the
existing service station on the Land, demolish the dwelling
on the Adjacent Lot
and extend the service station to that lot, and to convert existing dwellings on
the lot to the west of the Adjacent
Lot (1 Albert Street) into offices
associated with the extended service station. However, that approval was not
acted upon.
The 2002 Development Approval
12 March 2002, the respondent granted the 2002
of Vincent Town Planning Scheme No. 1
2002 DA provides as follows:
Approval to commence development in accordance with the application for Town
Planning Approval dated 15th January 2002 for CHANGE
OF USE FROM SERVICE STATION
TO SERVICE STATION AND VEHICLE SALES PREMISES and the attached amended plans
dated 5th March 2002 was
GRANTED in accordance with the provisions of the Town
of Vincent Town Planning Scheme and the Metropolitan Region Scheme subject
to the following conditions:
approved plans
(a) two vehicle hoists, a toilet and a 'shop/office' area
within the building located on the Land;
(b) three petrol pumps and a kerosene pump; and
(c) the five car bays previously referred to, which are to be used for the
display of vehicles for sale.
the 2002 DA was granted, the Land was zoned Commercial under
and the TPS1
Zoning Table
that each of the use classes 'service station' and 'vehicle sales premises' was
a 'AA' use.
TPS1, an 'AA' use was one which was 'not permitted unless the Council has
exercised its discretion by granting planning
Local Planning Scheme No. 2
respondent's
Local Planning Scheme No. 2
) was gazetted on 16
LPS2, the Land was at all times, and remains, zoned District
gazettal, the Zoning Table to LPS2 provided that the use of land in the District
Centre zone:
(a) for a 'service
station' was a 'D' use; and
(b) for 'motor vehicle, boat or caravan sales' was an 'A' use.
18(2) of LPS2 provides that:
(a) a 'D' use is one that is 'not
permitted unless the local government has exercised its discretion by granting
development approval';
(b) an 'A' use is one that is 'not permitted unless the local government has
exercised its discretion by granting development approval
after giving special
notice in accordance with clause 64 of the deemed
provisions'.
12 to LPS2 was gazetted on 27 February 2024 (
). By Am 12, the
use class 'service station' was reclassified in the Zoning Table from a 'D' use
in the District Centre to an 'X'
is one that cl 18(2) states 'is not permitted by this Scheme'.
1 turns on the construction of cl 22 of LPS2. Clause 23 is relevant to Issue 2.
It is convenient to reproduce them here in
Non-conforming
(1) Unless specifically provided, this Scheme
does not prevent -
(a) the continued use of any land, or any structure or building on land, for
the purpose for which it was being lawfully used immediately
commencement of this Scheme; or
(b) the carrying out of development on land if -
(i) before the commencement of this Scheme, the development was lawfully
approved; and
(ii) the approval has not expired or been cancelled.
(2) Subclause (1) does not apply if -
(a) the non-conforming use of the land is discontinued; and
(b) a period of 6 months, or a longer period approved by the local
government, has elapsed since the discontinuance of the nonconforming
(3) Subclause (1) does not apply in respect of a non­conforming use of
land if, under
of the Act, the local government -
(a) purchases the land; or
(b) pays compensation to the owner of the land in relation to the
nonconforming use.'
to non-conforming use
(1) A person must not, without
development approval -
(a) alter or extend a non-conforming use of land; or
(b) erect, alter or extend a building used for, or in conjunction with, a
nonconforming use of land; or
(c) repair, rebuild, alter or extend a building used for a nonconforming use
that is destroyed to the extent of 75% or more of its
(d) change the use of land from a non-conforming use to another use that is
not permitted by the Scheme.
(2) An application for development approval for the purposes of this clause
must be advertised in accordance with clause 64 of the
deemed provisions.
(3) A local government may only grant development approval for a change of
use of land referred to in subclause (1) d) if, in the
opinion of the local
government, the proposed use -
(a) is less detrimental to the amenity of the locality than the existing
nonconforming use; and
(b) is closer to the intended purpose of the zone in which the land is
The Parties' Submissions
respondent's position as to Issue 1 can be briefly stated.
respondent accepts that the criteria provided by cl 22(1)(a) of LPS2 are
established. That is, the respondent accepts that immediately
commencement of LPS2 in 2018 the Land was being lawfully used as a service
station and for vehicle
Specifically, the respondent accepts the lawfulness of the use of the Land as it
was undertaken pursuant to the 2002 DA until that
use ceased in late
from the date upon which LPS2 commenced on 16 May 2018.
the respondent submits that cl 22(1)(a) 'does not apply' because cl 22(2) is
use of the Land as a service station was discontinued in or by no later than
December 2021;
(b) more than six months have since elapsed; and
(c) no longer period has been approved under cl 22(2)(b).
to the respondent's position is the meaning of the term 'discontinued' in cl
22(2)(a), and the cognate term 'discontinuance'
in cl 22(2)(b).
respondent submits, in effect, that those terms should be understood by
reference only to relevant physical activities on the
Land and that 'the
concepts of abandonment and intention' are, in effect,
irrelevant.
position may be described by way of three submissions.
OTR draws a distinction between what it says are the 'existing use rights'
created by cl 22(1)(a) and the 'non-conforming use rights'
referred to in cl
submits that the existing use rights created by cl 22(1)(a) arise upon the
coming into effect (i.e. the gazettal) of LPS2. In
doing so, OTR emphasises the
absence in cl 22(1)(a) of any reference to the amendment of the scheme.
contrast, OTR notes that the term 'non-conforming use' is defined in LPS2 as
having the same meaning as provided in
Planning and
Development Act
a use of land which, though lawful immediately before the coming into operation
of a planning scheme
or amendment to a planning scheme
, is not in
conformity with a provision of that scheme which deals with a matter specified
in Schedule 7 clause 6 or
effect is, OTR submits, that:
(a) because the use of the Land as a
service station was lawful immediately prior to the gazettal of LPS2 on 16 May
2018, it remained
lawful as an 'existing use' under cl 22(1)(a) from that
(b) the use of the Land as a service station became a non­conforming use
upon the gazettal of Am 12 on 27 February 2024, which
was an amendment to LPS2;
(c) as a result, the commencement of any six month period relevant to cl
22(2)(b) can only have occurred on and from 27 February 2024.
OTR submits that the term 'discontinued' in cl 22(2)(a) must be understood
by reference to matters that go beyond the mere
cessation of physical activities
on the Land. It submits that discontinuance 'must require abandonment of the
use, in that there
is no relevant intention to continue the use, rather than
merely the physical cessation of the
further submits that, '[w]hile the service station has not operated since about
December 2021, there has been no abandonment
because there has been a sustained
and ongoing intention to develop the subject site for a service
OTR submits that if there has been any discontinuance (which it denies), it has
not persisted for a duration of six
Clause 22(1)(a) is Engaged
agree with the parties' common position that cl 22(1)(a) is engaged.
parties proceeded on the agreed basis that the Land was being lawfully used as a
service station and for vehicle sales, pursuant
to the 2002 DA, until at least
September 2021.
is, the parties were agreed that:
(a) the Land was, as a fact, used
as a service station and for vehicle sales until at least September 2021;
(b) that use was lawful as a result of the 2002 DA, which continued to have
effect, notwithstanding the gazettal of LPS2 in 2018.
The Land Continued to be Used as a Service Station until Late 2021
facts support the first of those two propositions, at least as it concerns the
use of the Land as a service station. In particular,
the evidence of Mr Kim
Pomario and Mr Andrew Caspar was to that effect.
Pomario's evidence was that he first visited the Land at a date he cannot
specifically recall between February and May 2021 and
that he noted various
improvements, including the fuel canopy, the bowsers and a workshop, and that he
observed the site being operated
as a 'Wesco Fuel' business involving 'the sale
of fuel and car repairs'.
evidence was also that:
(a) OTR entered into a contract to buy the
Land and the Adjacent Lot on 26 May 2021 (
(b) the Contract became unconditional on 23 September 2021;
(c) settlement of the Contract occurred on 23 November 2021;
(d) by the Contract, OTR bought only the Land and the Adjacent Lot. OTR did
not purchase the service station business because OTR's
'purpose in purchasing
the [Land and the Adjacent Lot] was to redevelop it into an OTR service station
and thereby continue the existing
service station operation through an OTR
service station, not as a Wesco fuel station'.
Caspar's evidence was to the fact that he has visited the Land on several
occasions and that he took photos on his first visit
on 16 September 2021.
Those photos appear to show the Land operating as a service station. His
evidence was that because the 'business
trading from the site was operational,
photos are predominantly of exterior buildings and the streetscape'.
of that evidence was materially challenged and I am satisfied, and I find as a
fact, that the Land was being used as a service
station until at least September
2021 and, more likely, November 2021.
The Use of the Land as a Service Station was Lawful
also agree that the use of the Land as a service station was lawful, because the
2002 DA, which authorised that use, continued
to have effect, notwithstanding
the revocation of TPS1, being the scheme under which the 2002 DA was
The 2002 DA Authorised the Use of the Land as a Service Station, Separate and
Distinct from its Use for Vehicle Sales
noted above, the 2002 DA permitted the change in the use of the Land from
'SERVICE STATION TO SERVICE STATION AND VEHICLE SALES
the respondent accepted that, therefore, the use of the Land as a service
station up to and including late 2021 was lawful,
its position leaves open the
possibility that what the 2002 DA authorised may be different to what is
proposed by OTR for the future
use of the Land.
respondent's written submissions do not expressly address that possibility and
neither did Mr De Kerloy SC expressly address
the issue in oral closing
submissions. However, he did cross-examine Mr Caspar in a manner that raised the
submitted that the 2002 DA authorised two separate and distinct uses ('service
station' and 'vehicle sales premises') and did
not authorise a third use that
amounts to a combination of the
Steytler J, with whom Kennedy and Ipp JJ agreed, described
the issue before them
whether it was open to the town's council to categorise the application as one
for approval of a dual use of the site in the form
of 'shop' (in the case of
each of the fast food sales area and the area marked 'shop' on the plans) and
'service station' or whether
the combination of these uses on the one site were
such as to require that combination to be categorised as a third and hybrid use
not mentioned in [the zoning tables] (there having then been no definition
of 'convenience store' in the Scheme). I should mention
that there was no
contest as to the proposition that a single development application might
properly propose concurrent but distinct
uses on the one site: (citations
Honour described the approach to be taken as follows:
The classification of the proposed uses should not be carried out either in a
mechanical or in an arbitrary way. If, in a particular
case, the manner in
which two uses are to be combined on a particular site makes it inappropriate to
categorise the resulting use
as a dual use with each use falling within a
definition in the Scheme, perhaps because the proposed manner of combining the
so changes the character of one or both of them that it or they can no
longer sensibly be taken to fall within the definition or
definitions in the
Scheme, then there should be no such categorisation. Where, on the other hand,
the character of each use remains
unaffected by the fact that one site is shared
between them there is no reason why the categorisation of each use should be any
than if each had been effected from its own site. If either use is
unacceptable within the particular location it would not be approved.
consequence would not be altered by the fact that another, permitted, use would
be effected from the same site.
concerned an application for a proposed use, rather than for
an existing use authorised by a development approval, there does not
be any reason why the same approach should not be taken here.
the following three reasons, I am satisfied that what was approved by the 2002
DA was two separate uses.
that result corresponds with the express wording of the 2002 DA, which
references two land uses, both of which are defined
in TPS1 (being the scheme
under which it was granted) and both of which are uses which the Zoning Table
prescribed as 'AA'
The 2002 DA does not reference another, third, use which might be
considered a hybrid of the two.
condition (iv) of the 2002 DA requires that 'a maximum of five (5) vehicles
shall be displayed for sale at any one
approved plans show those five numbered car spaces as adjacent to Angove
plans thereby mark out a separate area for vehicle sales which was physically
separated from fuel sales and vehicle servicing.
While any vehicle
purchases would, I imagine, have been settled in the 'Shop Office' (also
shown on the plans), which would also
have been where payment for the sale of
fuel or for vehicle servicing occurred, it could not be said, in my view, that
'the proposed
manner of combining the two uses so changes the character of one
or both of them that it or they can no longer sensibly be taken
to fall within
the definition or definitions in the
recourse to the application for development
plain that the use of the Land for the purposes of vehicle sales was
'additional' and a 'supplement' to the use of the Land
as a service
these reasons, I am satisfied that the 2002 DA approved the use of the Land for
the purpose of a service station and, separately,
for the purpose of vehicle
The 2002 DA Continued to Have Effect Despite the Revocation of TPS1 By LPS2
the recent decision of
Chief Justice Quinlan held that the development approval on which the appellant
in that case relied ceased to have effect upon the
revocation of the scheme
under which it was granted where that scheme was replaced with one which
prohibited the use permitted by
doing so, his Honour
NSW Court of Appeal's decision in
with approval. In that case, Handley JA (with Meagher and Beazley JJA
agreeing) said:
consent is not a general licence to carry out development, and in particular is
not a general licence to continue to use the land
for the authorised purpose.
It is a particular licence to carry out development which is conditionally
prohibited by a planning
instrument. Its function is merely to make lawful
development which is prohibited by that instrument without consent.
use of land which is authorised by a valid consent is lawful while the planning
instrument under which it was granted remains
in force. In the absence of
appropriate transitional provisions, the effect of a consent will not extend
beyond the life of the
planning instrument under which it was granted.
The repeal of that planning instrument, and its replacement by another,
will, without
more, deprive that consent of further effect.
the new planning instrument absolutely prohibits the use previously authorised
by a consent, that consent can have no direct
operation on that prohibition.
The irrelevance of that consent as a protection against that prohibition will
not be affected by
a transitional provision which continues that consent in
force, or deems it to have been granted under the new planning instrument.
prohibition being absolute, the existence of a past consent is an
irrelevance.
party with the benefit of an existing consent therefore requires further
protection against the absolute prohibition in the new
planning instrument. This
has been given in the past by existing use provisions either in the new planning
instrument or in the Act.
Such provisions enable existing uses which were
lawful, immediately before the new planning instrument came into effect, to be
A former consent remains important because it may establish a lawful
origin for an existing use, but it will have no further effect
under the new
planning instrument. In particular it cannot as a mere consent prevent the
enforcement of an absolute prohibition on
that use in the new planning
instrument.
Quinlan CJ qualified his support for the preceding passages in
by saying that 'it is necessary to ... identify whether
there are any "appropriate transitional provisions" that extend the life
consent or development approval beyond the life of the planning instrument under
which it was
Honour referred, in that context, to the decision of the NSW Land and
Environment Court in
which concerned circumstances where, as is the case here but which was not the
case in either
, the new planning
scheme which revoked and replaced the former scheme under which the relevant
approval was granted did not prohibit
the use approved by the
consent/approval.
, Lloyd J held that 'there is no reason why a consent
granted under the Act should not be regarded as being "in force", simply because
the repeal of an environmental planning instrument has changed the
considerations which will govern the grant of future consents
and, possibly,
also the consequences which will flow from having or not having an extant
Am 12, there was nothing in LPS2 which could be said to do anything more than
'change[ ] the considerations which will govern
the grant of future consents'
save for cl 22 which, in my view, constitutes an 'appropriate transitional
provision' which extends
the life of an extant approval.
Accordingly,
and for these reasons, I agree with the parties that the 2002 DA continued to
have effect pursuant to cl 22(1)(a), notwithstanding
the revocation of TPS1
and its replacement with LPS2.
Clause 22(1)(b) is Not Engaged
was a difference between the parties as to whether cl 22(1)(b) was engaged
- OTR submitted that it was and the respondent that
it was not.
my finding as to cl 22(1)(a), nothing turns on this point.
for completeness, I find that cl 22(1)(b) is
engaged by the
facts of this case because that clause is concerned with, and limited to,
approvals concerned with 'development' in
the narrow sense of that term; that
is, the sub-clause is not concerned with approvals that concern the 'use' of
land, only with
its 'development'.
is evident in the contrast between the language used in each of cl 22(1)(a)
and cl 22(1)(b) - the former refers to the 'continued
use of the land'
while the latter speaks of the 'carrying out of development'.
the term 'development' is defined in s 4 of the P&D Act to mean 'development
or use of any land ...', the law in this State
has long recognised that,
depending on the context, the term 'development' may be used in a narrow sense
to mean 'activities which
result in some physical alteration to the
provisions to cl 22(1)(b) of LPS2 have previously been held by the Court of
Appeal to reflect that
distinction.
Chief Justice in
reached the same
Accordingly, the same result must follow here.
The Use of the Land as a Service Station Has Not Been Discontinued
noted above, the respondent's case is that the use of the Land as a service
station was 'discontinued' when OTR fenced the Land
in late 2021 because that
was the time when the physical activities associated with the use of the Land as
a service station
disagree for the following three reasons.
the law in this State is quite clear that 'discontinuance' is
determined by simply asking whether activities on the relevant land have
and as an expansion of the first point, the subjective intention of the relevant
landowner is relevant to (although not determinative)
of the question whether a
particular land use has been discontinued.
OTR's subjective intention, as evidenced by its actions, was at all relevant
times, and remains, that the Land is to be used
for the purposes of a service
will address these matters in turn.
Discontinuance is not Merely a Cessation of Activities
, Quinlan CJ was concerned with provisions from two
Shire of Collie planning schemes - cl 4.10 of TPS5 and cl 22 of TPS6. The terms
of cl 22 of TPS6 were identical to those of cl 22 of LPS2 in the present
of cl 4.10 of TPS5 were different but his Honour dealt with the two provisions
In accordance with both cl 4.10 of TPS 5 and cl 22 of TPS 6, and as recognised
in the chapeau of paragraph 16 of the Statement of
Claim, a non-conforming use
will cease to be lawful if it has been discontinued for six months or more. In
that context a use will
not be 'discontinued' simply because it is 'marked by
some interruptions or breaks which are not of such a kind to bring about a
termination or abandonment of the use'. Whether a use has 'continued', and
conversely whether it has been 'discontinued', is therefore
a question of fact
and degree that must have regard to the practical realities of the use of land
and to the context and purpose
of planning controls.
quote in the middle of the above passage is from
which concerned the proper construction of s 309(2) of the
Local Government Act 1919
(NSW). That section provided as
Nothing in this section shall preclude the continuance of the use of any
building for any purpose for which the same was used immediately
before the date
of the proclamation aforesaid, or the alteration, enlargement, rebuilding or
extension of any building used for any
such purpose whether or not such
alteration, enlargement, rebuilding, or extension involve the use of adjoining
land which immediately
before the date of the proclamation was in the same
ownership or for such other purpose as the council thinks reasonable in the
circumstances.
J, with whom the rest of the Court (Barwick CJ, McTiernan and Gibbs JJ) agreed,
The expression 'the continuance of the use' in its natural and ordinary sense
may be conveniently rendered as 'the continued use'.
So understood the
expression connotes neither a use which is commenced afresh after prior
termination or abandonment, nor a continuity
of use which is necessarily
uninterrupted or unbroken. Rather does it suggest a use which is still
continuing, notwithstanding that
it may be marked by some interruptions or
breaks which are not of such a kind to bring about a termination or abandonment
Confirmation for this view is, I think, to be found in the nature and character
of the sub-section. It makes lawful a use which
would otherwise be a breach of
the general prohibition made in the public interest. It mitigates the impact of
the prohibition in
relation to the use to which premises are put at the relevant
date. But there is no apparent policy consideration which would serve
explain why there should be any relaxation of the general prohibition in favour
of those who at some future date, long after the
earlier use terminated, propose
to commence afresh the use to which the premises were put at the relevant
the identical terms of cl 22 with the relevant provision in TPS6 in
, I consider myself bound to reject the respondent's
submission that 'discontinuance' occurs upon the physical cessation
of activities.
in any event, I respectfully agree with the conclusion and reasons given by his
Honour, which are consistent with and apply
long­accepted principles and
such, the question whether a land use has been discontinued is not to be
considered by reference only to whether relevant physical
activities have ceased
to be carried out on the land.
whether a use has been discontinued is a question of fact and degree and regard
must be had to all of the facts and circumstances,
including 'to the practical
realities of the use of land and to the context and purpose of planning
Subjective Intention is Relevant to the Question whether Discontinuance has
necessary corollary of the respondent's submission that 'discontinuance' for the
purposes of cl 22(2)(a) of LPS2 occurs when there
is a cessation of activities
on the Land, is that the subjective intention of the occupier of the land is
irrelevant to the question.
respondent's written submissions made that proposition explicit, saying that
construing cl 22(2) such that discontinuance occurs
when there is a cessation of
activity 'focusses on and adheres to the statutory text, in which the concepts
of abandonment and intention
are absent. It avoids the very practical problems
which could exist if intention (including subjective intention) was required to
divined ...'
contrast, OTR says that 'discontinued' in cl 22(2) 'must require abandonment of
the use, in that there is no relevant intention
to continue the use
my view OTR's submission should be accepted.
have already referred to the High Court's decision in
case concerned an application for approval to demolish buildings across four
lots, one of which had existing use rights as a
service station. It was
proposed to develop the lots with new buildings, one of which was proposed to be
used as a service station.
The local government refused building permission on
grounds that included that the proposed buildings could not be used for their
proposed purposes. Banool sought declarations that they could.
determined the meaning of the 'continuance of the use' (as described
above), Mason J then applied that meaning to the facts
in relation to each
of the four lots. The local government submitted that, as the service station
had not been used for the four
years since Banool had applied for building
permission, the use had been abandoned. The Court (per Mason J)
rejected that submission,
It is plain enough that the respondent has at all times intended that the
premises should be used as a service station and for car
parking and that the
only reason why that intention has not been executed is that the Council refused
to grant the application and
that litigation has ensued. In the circumstances
the lapse of time, since the premises were last used as a motor garage, although
considerable, is not enough to warrant the conclusion that the existing use was
abandoned or terminated.
principle implicit in this passage - that intention is relevant to the question
whether a use of land has been discontinued -
has been applied several times
since then, in several jurisdictions and across different legislative
provisions.
respondent's case is to the effect that those cases were concerned with
different statutory provisions and that focus must be
given to the particular
language used in cl 22(2); that is, 'discontinued'. Moreover, it submits that
having regard to intention
will result in considerable uncertainty which its
preferred approach - the sole focus on when the physical activities ceased -
the extent that that submission seeks to draw a distinction between cases
concerning statutory regimes different to the regime
in this State, I disagree.
I have said, Quinlan CJ in
was dealing with two
planning schemes, the relevant provisions of one of which was identical to cl 22
para [145] his Honour distinguished between existing use rights associated
with a development approval, which he said cannot be
abandoned, and
'non-conforming rights', which he said '
abandoned'.
footnote associated with that last proposition is a reference to
Dr Willey's learned text
Planning and Environmental Law in
Western Australia.
footnote cites para [15.20] but that is clearly a typographical error. It is
almost certainly intended to be a reference to
para [15.210]. In both that and
para [15.90], which are mutually cross-referenced, Dr Willey discusses
abandonment and discontinuance.
In both paragraphs he describes the relevant
inquiry as being first, how the premises are being used in fact and, second, if
premises are not being used, 'whether there is a relevant intention to
continue the use in fact which once was used in fact'.
proposition that subjective intention is relevant to the question of
discontinuance is entirely consistent with the broader principle,
stated above
at para [81], that discontinuance is a question of fact and degree, and that
interruptions or breaks short of abandonment
will not amount to a
discontinuance.
my view, Quinlan CJ's referencing of Dr Willey's text at para [145] of
is authority for that proposition and, with respect,
may be that the respondent's criticism of the test as enunciated has some
strength and a test for discontinuance that is concerned
only with physical
activities would result in greater certainty than the current test. But in
circumstances where I am satisfied
that the law is clear, it is not my task to
consider its suitability.
Any Discontinuance of the Use of the Land as a Service Station Could Not Begin
Prior to the Gazettal of Am 12
I have previously stated, Am 12 was gazetted on 18 February 2024.
From that date, the use of the Land as a service station, which
had previously
been lawful pursuant to the 2002 DA, became prohibited.
submitted that it was on that date, due to the gazettal of Am 12, that the
use of the Land as a service station became a 'non­conforming
use', being
the term used in cl 22(2)(a), and as defined in s 172 of the P&D Act.
further submitted that, until the use became non-conforming, it could not be
discontinued pursuant to cl 22(2)(b). That is, OTR
submitted that any period of
discontinuance can only begin after the use in question becomes non-conforming.
respondent's position is quite different. It submitted was that a six-month
period of discontinuance relevant to cl 22(2) could
begin at any time, including
a time when the use of the Land was lawful under the 2002 DA.
the respondent submitted that the discontinuance in the present case began in
it had already been in effect for well over six months prior to the gazettal of
Am 12 in February 2024. As I understand
the submission, the result of the
respondent's preferred construction of cl 22(2)(a) is that cl 22(1)(a) never
took effect at all.
my view, the respondent's submission should be rejected and OTR's submission
should be accepted.
allow a period of discontinuance to begin while the 2002 DA continued to have
effect would be contrary to the well established
principle that a planning
permission, such as the 2002 DA, cannot be abandoned.
, Handley JA, with whom the other judges agreed, having
considered both UK and Victorian
there is no general principle of planning law in this State that a valid consent
which has not lapsed and is capable of being implemented
can be extinguished by
abandonment. ... On the contrary, subject to the express provisions of the Act,
such a consent remains in
force indefinitely.
passage immediately precedes those paragraphs which Quinlan CJ quoted and relied
upon in the passages from
referred to above, at para
, Quinlan CJ said
For completeness I would also observe that the distinction sought to be drawn by
the plaintiff in this case between 'existing
use rights' and 'non-conforming use
rights' was misconceived. As Dr Willey noted, '[t]he concept of "existing use
rights", in the
context of planning law, can be somewhat confusing'. Indeed it
can. ... In some contexts, 'existing use' is simply a synonym for
'non-conforming use'. In another, different, sense 'existing use rights' refers
to rights based on an existing development approval,
notwithstanding that there
has been a 'change in land use' that is 'within the scope of what is currently
permitted' by that approval.
In that context, the notion that a development
approval cannot be abandoned makes obvious sense.
Nevertheless,
and at the risk of labouring the point, that is not this case. In this case,
for the reasons I have explained, the
2006 Approval was not an 'existing
development approval' after the commencement of TPS 5. From that point in time,
there was, relevantly,
no development approval that could be 'abandoned'. As
Auburn Council v Nehme
at [29], '[t]here is ... nothing
in the speech of Lord Scarman in
Pioneer Aggregates
which deals
with the continuing effect of a consent under a planning instrument after its
repeal'. Non-conforming use rights, of
course, can be abandoned, as they depend
for their continued vitality on the actual use of the land in
the reasons set out above at paras [62] - [68], the 2002 DA continued to have
effect after the revocation of TPS1 by the gazettal
of LPS2 in 2018.
Accordingly,
in my view, the 2002 DA could not be abandoned by OTR until the gazettal of Am
12 on 24 February 2024 when the use of
the Land as a service station became
non-conforming. As such, the fact that there were no activities carried out on
the Land consistent
with its use as a service station between late 2018 and 24
February 2024 is not relevant to the question of
discontinuance.
The Use of the Land for the Purpose of a Service Station Was Not Discontinued
for At Least Six Months after 24 February 2024
relevant evidence in this regard is that of Mr Pomario, Mr Caspar and
Mr Hidding.
have previously detailed some of Mr Pomario's evidence. He is the CEO of PC
Infrastructure Pty Ltd, which is a member of the Peregrine
group of companies
and 'is a design, development and project management company'. OTR is also a
member of the Peregrine group of
evidence includes that:
(a) OTR was 'established as a special
purpose vehicle to hold ... [the Land] ... and to act as the proponent in
respect of any approvals
required to continue operating the ... [Land] as a
service station';
(b) OTR's purpose in purchasing the Land and the Adjoining Lot was 'to
redevelop it into a OTR service station and thereby continue
the existing
service station operation through an OTR service station, not as a Wesco fuel
(c) It was 'identified' in the 'environmental due diligence that the [Land's]
existing fuel system was in need of
replacement';
(d) He has 'maintained responsibility for the management and proposed
development of the
Caspar's evidence is that he is also employed by PC Infrastructure Pty Ltd and
holds the position of General Manager - Planning.
Caspar's evidence is that he instructed Mr Hidding 'on or about 3 December
2021' to prepare and lodge an application with the
relevant development
assessment panel (
DAP Application
the hearing I gave leave for Mr Caspar to give evidence that went beyond the
scope of his witness statement. Specifically, he
was asked questions as to the
nature of the DAP Application.
said that the DAP Application was for the demolition of the buildings on the
Land as well as the existing dwelling on the Adjacent
Lot and for the
redevelopment of both lots as 'an entirely new service station and convenience
was taken to a copy of the refusal of the DAP
Application.
formal notice of refusal states that the application was lodged with the
Development Assessment Panel (
) on 6 September 2022, was refused
at a meeting of the DAP on 3 May 2023 and that notice of that refusal was
given by letter dated
9 May 2023.
was common ground that OTR lodged an application for review of the refusal of
the DAP Application on 31 May 2023 (DR 81 of
the parties have sought to mediate that matter, it remains
unresolved.
Hidding's evidence was that a 'pre-lodgement meeting' for the DAP Application
occurred with the City of Vincent on 20 September
2021, that he lodged the DAP
Application on 25 July 2022 and it was accepted by the DAP on 9 September
Pomario's witness statement said that following the refusal of the DAP
Application he instructed an in-house architect to 'undertake
inspection of the existing improvements' on the Land for the purposes of
assessing the condition of those structures with
a view to OTR operating a
service station business on the Land pending review of that
Caspar's evidence was that, following the refusal of the DAP Application,
OTR became aware that LPS2 had been amended to prohibit
the service station use
on the Land and that to protect against the possibility that its application for
review of the refusal of
the DAP Application may not succeed, OTR 'wanted
to have at least the possibility of using the existing improvements to continue
to exercise the right to sell fuel from that
Caspar's evidence was that he instructed Mr Hidding to prepare and lodge an
application for development approval 'to renovate
the existing improvements on
the ... Land' in accordance with the asserted non-conforming
application was lodged on 15 August
described the application as follows:
Save for the rear existing shed which is proposed to be demolished and replaced
with two staff car-parking bays to be accessed from
the rear lane, I did not
instruct Nik Hidding to seek approval by way of the Application to demolish the
existing improvements on
the Subject Land.
Each of the works the subject of the Application are for the purpose of
maintaining the existing structures or to repair the existing
structures on the
Subject Land. The works the subject of the Application are not to alter the
essential nature of the Subject Land
as a service station but are to bring the
site into accordance with contemporary design standards for the storage and sale
by the OTR brand.
Hidding's evidence was to the same effect, saying that the application was
'limited to works on the [Land] aimed at improving
the existing structures on
the [Land] to enable the service station to recommence trading
he notes, the cover letter to the application is also to the same effect. It
states that the 'proposed refurbishment works are
aimed at improving the
existing development, which is currently in a poor state, and will enable the
service station to recommence
application was refused at the respondent's meeting of 20 August 2024 and
notice of that refusal was given by letter dated 26
August 2024. OTR
sought review of that refusal by application lodged 13 September 2024.
my view the preceding evidence very clearly demonstrates
(a) The subjective intention of those controlling OTR was that
the Land would be, and was, purchased for use as a service station;
(b) That subjective intention was promptly put into effect by engaging Mr
Hidding in December 2021;
(c) Although there is some period of about eight months between his
engagement and the lodgement of the DAP Application in July 2022,
nothing to suggest that anything occurred during that period other than that Mr
Hidding worked, presumably with others,
such as architects and officers or
employees of OTR, on the preparation and lodgement of the DAP Application;
(d) The DAP Application, while it proposed the demolition of the buildings on
the Land, anticipated the ongoing use of the Land as
a service station, albeit
one with a modern offering;
(e) OTR (and Mr Hidding) also acted promptly following the refusal of the DAP
Application in May 2023 to both seek review of that
refusal (in the same month)
and to lodge a new/further application with the respondent for the approval of
works in August 2023;
(f) Equally, OTR and Mr Hidding acted promptly to seek review of the refusal
by the respondent in August 2024 of the application for
development approval of
short, while there have been no physical activities on the Land consistent with
its use as a service station since late 2021,
OTR has throughout maintained a
subjective intention to recommence those activities and, significantly, has
acted promptly and consistently
with that intention.
for most of the relevant time period, OTR was either waiting for the DAP to make
a decision (July 2022 to May 2023), waiting
for the respondent to make a
decision (August 2023 to August 2024) or was the applicant for review of
one or both of those decisions
in this Tribunal.
only possible exception to the above summary concerns the period between
December 2021, when Mr Hidding was engaged, and July
2022, when he lodged
the DAP Application. There is no evidence before me as to what occurred in that
period, which cannot be described
my view, that absence of evidence does not allow me to infer that the use of the
land as a service station was discontinued at
any time but, even if it did, I
consider it most unlikely that any such discontinuance was for more than six
months, given the total
period between December 2021 and July 2022 is only about
eight months.
short, even if I accepted the respondent's submission that discontinuance might
commence at any time (which I have previously
rejected), I am satisfied that
there has not been a period of discontinuance of more than six months.
I am correct, and any discontinuance could not commence until 24 February
2024, I find that there has not been any period of discontinuance
because, by that date, OTR had two applications before the Tribunal, both of
which sought approval for works which would re-establish
the use of the Land as
a service station.
with the passage in
, that should be seen as evidence
demonstrating intention and time should not, therefore, run against OTR in those
circumstances.
Conclusion as to Issue 1
the above reasons, I am satisfied that the Land has the benefit of
non-conforming use rights for use as a service
in Issue 2 is an anterior question as to whether cl 60 of the deemed provisions
prevails over cl 23 of LPS2 to the extent
that they are inconsistent, as per
s 257B(3) of the P&D Act.
parties made submissions in this regard; OTR submits that cl 60 prevails
over cl 23 and the respondent submits that it does
not. It is fair to say
that the interaction of those two provisions (and cl 61 of the deemed provisions
and cl 22 of LPS2) is far
from straightforward.
it is not necessary for me to resolve that issue because, regardless of which
provision applies, the answer is the same
- development approval is
The Proposed Works
evidence is that OTR seeks to carry out quite considerable works on the
buildings and structures currently built on the Land.
In that regard, no
one suggested that what is proposed does not amount to 'works' as that term is
defined by cl 1 of the deemed
provisions.
Hidding's cover letter of 14 August 2023
those works as to the following
entry doors and new shopfront windows in place of existing roller doors;
(b) The replacement of the fuel canopy;
(c) The filling in of the existing roller door that opens up onto Woodville
(d) The filling in of the existing window on the southern elevation that
opens onto the right of way;
(e) Replacement of fuel bowsers and underground fuel tanks;
(f) The demolition of the rear shed;
(g) The replacement of an existing pylon sign;
(h) The installation of a new 2.1m high 'refuse enclosure'; and
(i) The creation of five customer car parking bays.
the original plans submitted on 14 August 2023 were subsequently amended to
remove the Adjacent Lot from the scope of the
description of each of the items of works remains
The Maintenance and Repair Exception to cl 60 of the Deemed Provisions Does Not
is OTR's case that while cl 60 of the deemed provisions prevails over cl 23 of
LPS2, Item 16 of the Table to cl 61 of the deemed
excludes the need to obtain development approval for 'maintenance and repair
phrase 'maintenance and repair works' is defined by cl 1 of the deemed
provisions as follows:
maintenance and repair works
means works that 
(a) are carried out to maintain or repair any building, structure or land or
otherwise to prevent any building, structure or land
from deteriorating or
falling into a state of disrepair; and
(b) do not result in any material alteration to the building, structure or land,
including any material alteration to the materials
used in or on, or the design
or specifications of, the building, structure or
definition leaves undefined the meaning of the terms 'maintain' and 'repair'.
The ordinary meaning of both terms involves the
continued existence of whatever
it is that is being maintained or repaired in a state that remains fundamentally
for example, the
Macquarie Dictionary Online
defines 'maintain' as 'to
keep in existence or continuance; preserve; retain', 'to keep in due condition,
operation, or force; keep
unimpaired', 'to keep in a specified state, position,
defines 'repair' as 'to restore to a good or sound condition after decay or
damage; mend', 'to restore or renew by any process
of making good,
strengthening, etc.' and 'to remedy; make good; make up for'.
meanings are consistent with para (b) of the definition which excludes 'material
alteration' from the scope of works included
in the defined term.
perhaps, the bricking in of an opening in the building, or the modification of
existing windows to a shopfront, might not
amount to a 'material alteration' in
and of itself, in my view the proposed works must be considered together and not
that is done the works, in my view, amount to a material alteration.
any event, Mr Hidding's letter makes clear that several significant individual
elements will be replaced wholesale, including
the canopy, the fuel bowsers, the
underground storage tanks and the existing pylon sign.
replacement of those items, which in the case of the underground storage tanks
and associated pipework will need to be dug up
first, cannot be described as
either maintenance or repair.
to the underground storage tanks, it is self-evident that their removal will be
a very considerable task, involving significant
the entire system of fuel delivery is fundamentally different to maintaining or
repairing it. Further, the plans show
that both the new bowsers and the new
underground tanks will be in different locations to those that they will
proposed works also include the erection of a new refuse enclosure. Plainly,
that is neither maintenance or repair.
these reasons, I find that the proposed works do not satisfy the definition of
'maintenance and repair works' and, therefore,
do not fall within the category
of exempt works provided by Item 16 of the Table to cl 61(1) of the deemed
provisions.
Approval is Required under cl 23(1)(b) of LPS2
alternative submission (i.e. if cl 60 of the deemed provisions does
apply) is that none of the paragraphs to cl 23(1) of LPS2 apply
to the proposed
convenience' sake, I again set out cl 23(1)
(1) A person must not, without development approval -
(a) alter or extend a non-conforming use of land;
(b) erect, alter or extend a building used for, or in conjunction with, a
nonconforming use of land; or
(c) repair, rebuild, alter or extend a building used for a nonconforming use
that is destroyed to the extent of 75% or more of its
(d) change the use of land from a non-conforming use to another use that is
not permitted by the Scheme.
agree with OTR
that cl 23(1)(a) and cl 23(1)(d) of LPS2 do not apply, as they are concerned
with the use of land, rather than its development in
the narrow sense (as to
which, see above at [69] to [74]).
am, however, contrary to OTR's
that cl 23(1)(b) applies because the proposed works amount to (amongst
other things) the alteration of a building used
for or in conjunction with a
non­conforming use of the Land.
particular, cl 23(1)(b) requires approval for the 'alteration' of a building
used for, or in conjunction with, a non-conforming
note the contrast between the use of the term 'alteration' in cl 23(1)(b)
of LPS2 and that of 'material alteration' in the definition
of 'maintenance and
repair works' in cl 1 of the deemed provisions.
have previously found that the proposed works to the building are such as to
amount to the 'material alteration' of the building.
As such, they
necessarily amount to its 'alteration'.
to other works that are not concerned with the alteration of a 'building', such
as the removal of the bowsers and underground
storage tanks, it is my view that
approval is also required.
follows necessarily from the Court of Appeal's decision in
. It held that the protection given by a clause in similar
terms to cl 22(1)(a) of LPS2 was limited to the protection of the
non­conforming
, and any such protection did not extend to
development
done pursuant to such use. As such, the Court held that the
clearing of trees for the purpose of the non-conforming use (rural pursuit)
required approval and, in the absence of such approval, it amounted to an
offence such that IVO's convictions were upheld.
doing so, the Court noted that 'a number of cases have recognised the
distinction between use and development in construing a
non-conforming use
clause as protecting use, but not extending to the carrying out of
development'.
have no doubt that the works associated with the removal and replacement of the
bowsers, underground storage tanks and associated
pipes amount to both works and
development. They will be considerable and will result in a 'physical
alteration of the land', including
that the bowsers will be in a different
location to the current situation. Those works therefore require development
so found, it is unnecessary to address the question of the application or
otherwise of cl 23(1)(c).
that, it is tempting to avoid making findings about that clause, which has
several inter-related difficulties with it.
in the event that I am held to be wrong about the application of cl 23(1)(b), it
is useful to make such findings as are
necessary to dispose of this
that end, I find that the clause does not apply because I am not satisfied that
the building the subject of (some of) the proposed
works has been 'destroyed',
whether to 75% of its value or otherwise.
am of that view because, in my view, the term 'destroyed' (and its cognate verb
'destroy') is concerned with positive action or
activity, rather than being the
result of neglect over a period of time.
accept that, in some cases, the result of a long period of neglect might be said
to be the 'destruction' of a building but, in
my view, that is not anticipated
by the clause.
any event, I am also not satisfied that the building the subject of some of the
proposed works has been 'destroyed' in any material
sense. Certainly, it has
been neglected and shows the effect of that neglect but the evidence before me
is to the effect that the
building is structurally
Garmony's evidence was to the effect that the improvements add no value to that
of the Land.
may be so, but I do not accept that demonstrates that the buildings have been
'destroyed', it merely reflects their value.
these reasons, I am satisfied that cl 23(1)(c) does not apply to the proposed
works such that development approval is required
as I have previously found, approval is required by cl 23(1)(b) for works
to the building and approval is otherwise required
for the other proposed works
such as the removal and replacement of the bowsers and associated underground
storage tanks and pipework.
Conclusion as to Issue 2
these reasons, the proposed works require approval.
Accordingly,
the matter should be listed for directions to allow it to be programmed through
to a hearing.
The Tribunal finds that:
(a) The land at 41 - 43 Angove Street, North Perth has the benefit of
non-conforming use rights for use as a service station.
(b) The proposed works the subject of the application require development
The Tribunal orders:
matter is listed for directions before Senior Member Willey on Friday, 14
November 2025.
certify that the preceding paragraph(s) comprise the reasons for decision of the
State Administrative Tribunal.
Associate to the Deputy President Judge Jackson
24 OCTOBER 2025
Respondent's
Section 24 Bundle of Documents dated 5 December 2024 (
Capitalisation in
6, page 101.
Officer's Report for the 2002 DA application: Exhibit 6, page
6, page 594.
Schedule to the Respondent's Submissions, paras 28 and
page 283; Schedule to the Respondent's Submissions, para
Exhibit 6, pages 270 and 283. The use class 'service station' was also
reclassified in other zones but it is not necessary to detail
addition, cl 24 of LPS2 provides for a register of non-conforming uses. It is
unnecessary to quote it or to say more about this
Respondent's Submissions, para
Respondent's Submissions, para
Respondent's Submissions, para
Respondent's Submissions, paras 18 - 39, esp 27 - 29 and 34; ts 108, 22 July
Applicant's Outline of Submissions for Preliminary Issues Hearing on 22 and 23
July 2025 (
Applicant's Outline
), paras 18 - 27, 42 -
Applicant's Outline, para
Applicant's Outline, para
Applicant's Outline, paras 53 -
Respondent's Submissions, para 16 (as amended at the
48 - 49, 22 July
Gull Petroleum (WA) Pty Ltd v Nashville Investments Pty Ltd
[1999] WASCA 12
102 LGERA 431
6, page 595.
Exhibit 6, page
6, page 99.
, 446 [52].
Industrial Rental Equipment Pty Ltd v Dungog Shire Council
(2019) 101 NSWLR 1
, [46] - [80];
Pty Ltd v CCA Investments - Bass Hill Pty Ltd
[2025] NSWCA 175
[73]. See, also,
City of Gosnells v Reid
[2024] WASCA 155
6, pages 728 and 731. However, it was generally agreed that such recourse could
be had if the approval explicitly referred
to and thereby incorporated the
extraneous material. That is the case
Smargiassi Nominees Pty Ltd v Shire of Collie
[2024] WASC 16
, [117] - [149], esp [117] -
, [114] and
Auburn Council v Nehme
[1999] NSWCA 383
(1999) 106 LGERA 19
Lederer v Sydney City Council
[2001] NSWLEC 272
(2001) 119 LGERA 350
, [122]. See, also,
House of Peace v Bankstown
[2000] NSWCA 44
(2000) 48 NSWLR 498
University of Western Australia v City of Subiaco
[1980] WASC 28
(1980) 52 LGRA 360
Shire of Murray v IVO Nominees Pty Ltd
[2020] WASCA 45
IVO Nominees
), [38] - [44].
- 110, 22 July
Woollahra Municipal Council v Banool Developments Pty Ltd
[1973] HCA 65
(1973) 129 CLR 138
not binding on me, the decision of Senior Member Willey in
Warr and Town
of Cambridge
[2020] WASAT 126
), [100] is
to the same
Respondent's Submissions, para
Applicant's Outline, para
Woolahra MC v TAJJ Investments Pty Ltd
(1982) 49 LGRA 123
Hudak v Waverley MC
70 LGRA 130
, 136 -137;
Leeming v Port Adelaide CC [No 2]
(1987) 62 LGRA 277
, 292; It is to be contrasted with the
relevance of intention when determining whether land was, at the time when the
planning scheme
took effect, actually being used:
Rosenblum v Brisbane
[1957] HCA 98
(1957) 98 CLR 35
R v City of Oakleigh; Ex parte New Gamble
Brickworks Pty Ltd
[1963] VicRp 92
(1962) 9 LGRA 258
above, the decision in
, [100] - [102] is also to the same
, [145]. Emphasis in the
Planning and Environmental Law in Western Australia
LawBook; see, also, Senior Member Willey's discussion of the issue in
Respondent's Submissions, paras 38 -
Pioneer Aggregates (UK) Ltd v Secretary of State for the
Environment
[1985] 1 AC 132
Park Street Properties
v South Melbourne City Council
[1990] VicRp 48
[1990] VR 545.
, [144] - [145]. Citations
Exhibit 3, paras 2, 7 and
Exhibit 3, para
Exhibit 3, para
July 2025. The DAP Application was subsequently amended to limit its scope to
the Land only - see below at [148].
pages 749 -
16, 22 July
22 July 2025.
Exhibit 4, paras 14 and
paras 32 - 33.
ts 16, 22 July 2025.
Exhibit 11,
Exhibit 6, page
Exhibit 6, page
Exhibit 6, page 34; ts 41 - 43, 22 July
Applicant's Outline, paras 71 -
provides an exclusion to the exception for approval where heritage issues arise.
There was no suggestion that the exclusion
Pioneer Concrete (Qld) Pty Ltd v Brisbane City Council
(1980) 145 CLR 485; (1980) 44 LGRA 346 per Stephen
Stewart and Town of Cottesloe
[2019] WASAT 100
Point Grey Development Company Pty Ltd and Shire of Murray
[2019] WASAT 106
such excavation will be filled in and covered over does not mean that they do
not amount to 'development' -
OMSB Pty Ltd and Shire of Ashburton
[2025] WASAT 24
Applicant's Outline, para
Applicant's Outline, paras 80 - 83 and 95 -
Applicant's Outline, paras 88 -
[46], citing
Nancy Shetland Pty Ltd v Melbourne and
Metropolitan Board of Works
(1974) 48 ALJR 448
34 LGRA 151
, 152 -153;
Aquatic Airways Pty Ltd v Warringah
(1990) 71 LGRA 10
Calvary Health Care Tasmania Inc v Hobart City Council
[2006] TASSC 10
(2006) 15 Tas R 271
144 LGERA 107
, [15] - [20];
Sorrento Apartments Pty Ltd v Mornington Peninsula Shire
[2001] VSC 302
(2001) 117 LGERA 43
Statement of Oliver William Nelson, dated 9 June 2025 and filed 17 June 2025
(Exhibit 5).
Witness Statement of Matthew John Garmony, dated 30 May 2025 and filed 3 June
2025 (Exhibit 8).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (645 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter