URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WATPAT/2004/225.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:09:54
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Humich and Anor v City of Fremantle [2004] WATPAT 225 (22 December 2004)
IN THE TOWN PLANNING
APPEAL TRIBUNAL OF
WESTERN AUSTRALIA
Appeal No. 243 of 2004
[2004] WATPAT 225
Heard: 2 December 2004
Decision: 22 December 2004
B E T W E E N:
IVAN HUMICH AND KATHLEEN HUMICH
CITY OF FREMANTLE
Ms M Connor
(Ordinary Member)
Development – Lift overrun shaft – Whether development is
incidental development and a minor projection – Building
height - Scale
– Loss of views
Cases referred to
Appearances
Greg Rowe (Agent) appeared for the Appellants
Dominic Mitchell (Agent) appeared for the Respondent
The Tribunal:
1. Ivan and Kathleen Humich (“
”) are the owners of
Part No 1/A (Pt Lot 808) Bellevue Terrace, Fremantle (“
2. The Appellants made application to the City of Fremantle
”) on 1 July 2004 for additions to the dwelling
currently under construction on the subject land. The additions comprised a
lift over-run to the approved lift shaft and a single car garage.
3. On 24 August 2004, the Director, Urban Management acting under delegated
authority issued planning approval for the single garage
component of the
application and refused planning consent for the lift overrun shaft as detailed
on revised plans dated 6 July 2004,
stating the following reasons for
“1. The proposal is contrary to the height limits
set by previous decisions for the overall development.
2. The proposed wall and roof heights do not comply with the requirements of
the Residential Design Codes.
3. The proposed development would prejudice the orderly and proper planning
and preservation of the amenity of the locality by virtue
of the additional
height, bulk and visual intrusion created.”
4. The Appellants by Notice of Appeal dated 12 October 2004 appealed against the
Respondent’s decision of 24 August 2004 to
refuse planning consent for the
lift overrun shaft.
5. The grounds of the appeal can be summarized as
(a) the lift overrun shaft is considered to be incidental development associated
with the dwelling, which satisfies the ‘Performance
Criteria’ and
‘Acceptable Development’ provisions of clause 3.10.2 of the
Residential Design Codes (“
Design Codes
(b) the proposal is considered to be a “minor projection” as defined
under the Design Codes and as such with respect
to building height is
(c) as an alternative design options, the Appellants are prepared to remove the
proposed zinc cupola above the lift overrun shaft,
which would reduce the height
of the structure by 0.8 metres;
(d) the application must be assessed on its own merits and a refusal based on a
condition placed on a previous approval is unreasonable;
(e) the proposal will have minimal impact on the amenity of the
6. The Respondent opposes the appeal on the basis
(a) a height limit has previously been established for the development on this
site in order to protect the amenity of surrounding
properties and neighbours.
The proposed development exceeds this height limit and is seen to impose upon
the amenity of the surrounding
properties and neighbours by virtue of its
height, bulk, scale and visual intrusion;
(b) the proposal is non-compliant with the building height requirements
specified in Element 7 – Building Height of the Design
(c) the height and bulk of the proposed lift overrun shaft is not considered to
be a desirable addition to the dwelling and the mass
of building close to the
property boundary is considered likely to adversely impact on neighbours and
will affect outlook and views.
7. The subject land is referred to as No 1A (Pt Lot 808) Bellevue Terrace,
Fremantle and is approximately 1428m
8. The subject land is bounded by residential lots facing Knutsford Street to
the north, Solomon Street to the east and south, and
Hampton Road to the west.
The lot is accessed via a battleaxe leg at the northern end of Bellevue
9. A two storey dwelling is currently under construction at the eastern end of
the site. Various other structures and improvements
relating to the dwelling
exist or are also under construction.
10. The R25 density coding of the subject land would allow the development of at
least an additional two, possibly three dwellings
11. The locality is predominantly residential in character comprising of
primarily older buildings, early 20
century buildings with some
newer infill, with a fairly strong mix in terms of scale. Mr Rowe was at pains
to point out that Solomon
Street contained some very substantial homes and that
there was a large four storey block of apartments adjoining one of the
of the subject land.
Nature of the
12. The proposal before the Tribunal involves the construction of a lift overrun
shaft above the existing shaft currently constructed
to the existing parapet
wall height of the dwelling. The lift overrun shaft is approximately 2.0 x 2.0
metre in area and 2.4 metres
above the existing parapet wall height. A shallow
domed zinc roof is proposed, adding a further 800mm to the height over the
of the structure.
13. The dwelling currently under construction is the product of a number of
planning applications. The initial planning consent,
issued on 18 November
2002, gave approval for the construction for a dwelling comprising both single
and two storey elements. A
number of conditions were imposed on the approval,
one of which related to limiting the height of the development,
“14. The maximum roof apex height of the
development shall be no more than 3m above the existing wall height of No 7
Solomon Street, and the maximum ridge height of the single storey
element shall be no more than 500mm above that wall.”
14. As a consequence of condition No 14, the proposal was modified to
incorporate a flat roof to the dwelling. This planning application
was approved
on 12 December 2002.
15. A further planning application was made by the Appellants which involved a
second storey addition to the single storey portion
of the dwelling. This
matter was considered by the Respondent at its meeting of 11 August 2003 and
planning consent was subsequently
granted. It would appear from the planning
officer’s report to the Respondent on this matter, that the existing wall
next to the boundary wall (referred to in condition 14, paragraph 13)
would not be increased in height as result of the modifications.
16. Approval to include a lift shaft for a hydraulic lift was subsequently
sought by the Appellants and approved under delegated
authority by the Director,
Urban Management on 22 March 2004. The current application, the subject of this
appeal, involves modifications
to the approved lift shaft to allow for a lift
Planning Framework
17. The subject land is zoned Urban under the
Metropolitan Region Scheme
”) and Residence with a site density of
“R25”, as illustrated on the Scheme Map under the City of Fremantle
Planning Scheme No 3 (“
18. Clause 14 of the Scheme establishes the need for planning approval.
19. Clause 47, by reference to Table Two: Building Requirements and clause 55 of
the Scheme, establishes that development of land
for any of the residential
purposes dealt with by the Design Codes is to conform to the provisions of those
Codes, unless otherwise
provided for in the Scheme.
20. Clause 16 requires that regard is to be given to the purpose for which the
land is zoned, the orderly and proper planning of
the locality, to the
preservation of the amenities of the locality and to the matters listed in
clause 77 and due regard is to be
given to any planning policy statement adopted
by the Council relating to specific areas, use classes or building types. The
specific matters listed in clause 77 relating to this application are
as follows:
“(f) the plot ratio, site coverage, setbacks,
height, landscaped area and parking;
(g) the form, layout, appearance and materials of buildings; ...
(i) the way in which buildings relate to the street and adjoining lots,
including their effects on landmarks, vistas, the landscape
or traditional
streetscape, and on the privacy, daylight and sunlight available to private open
space and buildings; ... and
(t) any other matters.”
21. Clause 83 of the Scheme provides the ability to seek public comment on an
application prior to its determination.
22. The first issue that confronts the Tribunal in this Appeal is whether the
proposed lift overrun shaft is incidental development
and a minor projection
which falls to be determined under Element 10 – Incidental Development
”) of the Design Codes or part of the wall height
to be determined in accordance with the provisions under Element 7 –
Building Height (“
23. The Appellants contended there is provision within the Design Codes under
Element 10 for external fixtures, such as a lift overrun,
to form part of a
dwelling and be considered as incidental development. The Appellants
maintained the proposal complied with both
the Acceptable Development provisions
and satisfied the Performance Criteria of this Element. The Appellants also
asserted that
the lift overrun shaft was a “minor projection” as
defined under the Design Codes and as such is exempt from consideration
Element 7 – Building Height.
24. The Respondent rejected these assertions and argued that the proposal is
more substantial and visually significant than any of
the external fixtures
identified in Element 10 and as such, a substantial and visually dominant
structure could not reasonable be
considered as incidental development. A
further argument, advanced by the Respondent during the cross examination of Mr
Rowe, centred
on the explanatory text of Element 10 which describes incidental
development as “development incidental to but either an essential
frequently occurring feature of residential development”. The line of
argument being that a lift in a residential dwelling
is not an essential or
frequently occurring feature, therefore not incidental development.
25. The Respondent also argued that the proposed lift overrun shaft was not a
“minor projection” as defined under the
Design Codes given that the
horizontal measurement of the structure was two and half times in excess of the
0.75 metres specified
in the definition.
26. In considering this issue the Tribunal examined the definitions of
‘Incidental Development’ and ‘Minor Projection’
contained in Part 2 of the Design Codes and reviewed the explanatory text of
both Elements 7 and 10. The Tribunal was also cognizant
of the arguments
presented by both parties.
27. Lift overruns are usually associated with multiple dwellings and commercial
developments, however, the Tribunal accepts the contention
of the Appellants
that the use of lifts is becoming more popular in larger style homes and as a
result of increasing affluence will
become a more common feature within this
28. Lift overruns are also usually associated with roof top plant and equipment
and could be considered to be akin to the external
fixtures nominated in the
explanatory text of Element 10. The listed as detailed in Element 10 is by no
means considered to be exhaustive.
Mr Mitchell under cross examination conceded
that it was conceivable that a lift overrun could be considered to be incidental
development
if the scale and form of the development was within the guidelines
suggested by the Design Codes.
29. In this instance, the Tribunal is persuaded by the arguments presented by
the Respondent concerning the built form of the proposed
lift overrun shaft as
it has been designed as an integral part of the dwelling which does not present
as a separate entity but as
a distinct vertical element forming part of the
overall design of the dwelling. Given this position, the Tribunal concludes
the lift overrun shaft as proposed is not an external fixture and as such
should not be assessed under Element 10 of the Design Codes.
30. As to whether this structure is a minor projection and exempt from
consideration under Element 7, both the definition of “minor
projection” and the explanatory text contained in Element 7 are specific
and consider chimneys, vent pipes aerial and other
appurtenance of like scale to
be minor projections and exempt from consideration under building height. The
question is whether
the proposed lift overrun falls to be considered “of
like scale”. “Minor Projection” is defined in the Design
Codes as follows:
“ - In relation to the height of a building: a chimney, vent pipe, aerial
or other appurtenance of like scale;
- In relation to a wall: a rainwater pipe, vent pipe, eaves overhangs, cornice
or other moulding or decorative feature, provided
that the projection does not
exceed 0.75m measured
horizontally.”
31. Mr Mitchell accepted that under certain circumstances there may be instances
where a chimney, vent pipe, aerial or other appurtenance
may achieve of height
of 2.0 metres plus. However, he raised the issue of horizontal measurement and
asserted that the lift overrun
shaft was two and half times in excess of the
0.75 metres specified in the definition. Mr Rowe conceded this point but
that the structure in terms of building height was a minor
projection.
32. The definition of ‘Minor Projection’ contains two
considerations, the first being in relation to the height of a
building and the
second in relation to a wall, which is understood to relate to projections into
setback areas as seen in clause
3.3.1A1iv. Consequently, the argument raised by
Mr Mitchell concerning the projection is not relevant to building height, the
issue is “of like scale” to the nominated structures, which
would involve consideration of the dimensions of the proposed
structure in
relation to the nominated structures.
No direct evidence was given by Mr
Mitchell suggesting that the lift overrun shaft was not of a like scale,
however, the planning
officer’s on this application (refer to Exhibit 3
Annexure 3), included the following comment:
“The proposed
lift overrun is approximately 2m x 2m x 3.2m. This is approximately four times
the area and twice the height
of the chimney indicated by the applicant in his
submission. The RD Codes require minor projections to be ‘of like
to a chimney, rainwater pipe, vent pipe, aerial, cornice, etc. The
proposed structure is not considered to be of the scale envisaged
33. In the context of the overall development, the proposed lift overrun shaft
may appear as a minor projection above roofline of
the dwelling, however, in the
context of what constitutes a minor projection under the definition contained in
the Design Codes,
it is difficult to conclude that the proposed lift overrun
shaft is a minor projection. Therefore, it is the Tribunal’s view
this instance, the proposal should be assessed against the provisions contained
in Element 7 of the Design Codes.
34. Element 7 establishes an objective set of height limits that correspond to
one, two and three storey heights. The specified
objective for Element 7
“To ensure that the height of buildings is consistent
with the desired scale in a given locality.”
35. Clause 3.7.1 A1.1 specifies the Acceptable Development requirements for
Element 7. Except where otherwise provided for in an
Planning Policy (emphasis added) development that complies with Table 3 –
Maximum Building Heights (i) Area is deemed
to meet the relevant Performance
Criteria. ‘Category B’ of the Table 3 is the default provision
where there is no Local
Planning Policy, which are as follows:
“Top of external wall (roof above) 6m
Top of external wall (concealed roof) 7m
Top of pitched roof 9m”
36. Mr Rowe agreed that if the lift overrun shaft was interpreted as wall height
then it did not comply with the Acceptable Development
requirements contained in
Element 7. Non-compliance with the Acceptable Development requirements invokes
assessment under the Performance
37. Clause 3.7.1 P1 of the Design Codes sets out the Performance Criteria, which
reads as follows:
“Building height consistent with the
desired height of buildings in the locality, and to recognise the need to
protect the amenities
of adjoining properties, including, where appropriate:
Adequate direct sun to
buildings and appurtenant open
Adequate daylight to major
openings to habitable rooms; and
to views of significance.”
38. The Respondent contended that the wall height of the lift shaft did not
satisfy the Performance Criteria specified in Element
7 as it significantly
increases the height and mass of the building in relation to the neighbouring
properties and is located in
a visually intrusive position resulting in the loss
of views of the coast and Fremantle City from adjoining properties. The
visual impacts on adjoining neighbours are not considered to be
reasonable by the Respondent.
39. The Appellants established that there was only one owner of an adjoining
property that was concerned about loss of views and
that there were trees on the
adjoining property and surrounding properties that exceeded the height of the
proposed lift overrun
shaft, that already obscuring views to the west. The
Respondent considered that it was probably reasonable to expect a two storey
building to take up part of the view, but regarded a two storey building with a
three storey overrun to be an unreasonable imposition
on visual amenity.
40. Mr Mitchell also referred to previous applications for the subject land
which involved the establishment of a height limit for
development in order to
protect the amenity of the surrounding properties and neighbours. This height
limit was determined with
reference to the height of the existing boundary wall
of No 7 & 9 Solomon Street. According to Mr Mitchell the height limit
equated to a maximum height of approximately 7.4 metres. The height of the lift
shaft incorporating the lift overrun on the eastern
elevation measures
approximately 9.6 metres to the top of the wall and 10.4 metres to the top of
the cupola.
41. As a part of the assessment process the Respondent sought comment from
neighbouring landowners and occupiers. One submission
was received objecting to
the construction of the lift overrun shaft as it was considered to be out of
character with the existing
building and the immediate area, imposing,
unsightly, and increased reflection may result from the zinc cupola. The
Respondent did
not call the objector as a witness to give evidence. Therefore
the Tribunal is unable to assess the veracity of the concern or the
weight to be
attributed to their perceived diminution of amenity.
42. The Appellants maintained that the proposed lift overrun shaft will enhance
the design of the existing dwelling and called Mr
Scott, who is an experienced
architect with considerable expertise and knowledge relating to development in
the Fremantle area, to
give evidence in regard to this matter. Mr Scott was of
the opinion that the extension to the lift shaft will assist in resolving
incomplete appearance of the existing and approved design and add to the
betterment of the appearance of the dwelling.
43. The Appellants also contended that the scale and bulk of the lift overrun
shaft would resemble many of the existing architectural
projections on
properties surrounding the subject land and produced a series of photographs
showing a number of tower developments
in the near vicinity. Mr Mitchell
acknowledged that some of the towers were of larger proportions than the
proposed lift overrun
shaft but highlighted that they were set back greater
distances from neighbouring properties.
44. The Appellants disputed the Respondent’s claim that the lift overrun
shaft would significantly increase the bulk, scale
and mass of the building and
provided figures relating to the west elevation showing that the lift overrun
portion, which has an
elevational view of about 6 square metres, represented
only 3 percent of the total surface elevation. Mr Mitchell did not dispute
these figures but suggested that figures showing the proportionate increase
relative to the area protruding above the boundary wall
at the rear of No 7
Solomon Street would have been more relevant in terms of the impact on the
adjoining properties.
45. Mr Rowe also pointed out that the subject land was capable of further
development under the R25 density coding and that there
could potentially be
more bulk and mass in the form of additional dwellings on the subject land. Mr
Mitchell under cross examination
conceded that this could be the case, but
considered that the impacts of any additional dwellings on the subject land on
the neighbours
to the east would be reduced as the site falls away to the
46. In relation to the height issue, the Appellants argued that impacts from a
pitched roof on the octagonal section of the building,
which was recommended for
approval by the planning officers in November 2002, would have been
significantly greater than that of
the proposed lift over-run shaft. This was
demonstrated in plan form, where a pitched roof was superimposed over the
octagonal section
of the building to show that this form of roof would have
obstructed a greater expanse of the view from the objector’s property.
47. In order to minimise the impact of the proposed lift overrun shaft on the
adjoining property, the Appellants suggested a compromise
involving the removal
of the cupola, thus reducing the height of the lift overrun by 0.8 metres.
48. Under Category B of the Acceptable Development requirements of Element 7, a
dwelling with a maximum wall height of 6.0 metres
incorporating a pitched roof
not exceeding 9.0 metres in height to the top of the pitch is deemed to comply
with the relevant Performance
Criteria. As there is no evidence to suggest that
the Respondent has adopted a Local Planning Policy which provides for
alternative
requirements, it is therefore quite conceivable that a development
complying with the requirements of Category B could have been
approved on site.
The height of the proposed lift overrun without the cupola exceeds the 9.0
metres permissible roof height for
pitched roofs by 0.6 metres.
49. The Performance Criteria specified in clause 3.7.1 P1 are set out
effectively in two parts. The first part is concerned about
the general impact
on the locality whereas the second part is concerned about the specific impact
on the adjoining property. On
the evidence, the Tribunal is satisfied that the
height of the proposed lift shaft will not adversely impact on the locality as
are a number of other tower elements in the immediate vicinity of the
subject land nor will the proposal adversely affect the streetscape
Solomon Street or Bellevue Terrance.
50. In regards to the second part of the Performance Criteria no evidence was
presented by the Respondent suggesting that the proposal
did not satisfied dot
points one and two of the criteria, therefore the only remaining issue is
protecting access to views of significance.
No evidence was produced by the
Respondent to show the extent of the loss of views from the adjoining property
nor was the owner
of the property called as a witness to give evidence on the
perceived impacts of the proposal. Questions were raised by the Appellants
to extent of the existing available views as there are trees on the adjoining
property and surrounding properties that exceeded
the height of the proposed
lift overrun shaft, that already obscure views to the west.
51. It is to be expected that as properties develop adjoining lots may lose some
of their views. The Tribunal considers that there
has been a significant
attempt by the Respondent to protect the views of the adjoining property by the
imposition of a condition
on previous approvals limiting the maximum roof apex
height of the dwelling to no more than 3.0 metres above the boundary wall of
7 and 9 Solomon Street. This condition, in effect, restricted the total height
of the building to 7.4 metres, whereas the Acceptable
Development requirements
of Element 7 (the deemed to comply provisions) allow 9.0 metres to the top
of the pitched roof. Although
the proposed lift overrun shaft may result in
some interruption to the view shed from the adjoining property, the Tribunal in
instance is prepared to support the lift overrun shaft without the cupola
as it is a comparatively small protrusion in the context
of the overall
development which has been sensitively incorporated into the design of the
dwelling to form a distinct vertical element
of a scale which is not uncommon in
this locality. On the evidence, the Tribunal is satisfied that the proposal
will have minimal
impact on the amenity of the area and will not prejudice the
orderly and proper planning of the locality.
52. For the forgoing reasons, the appeal is upheld.
53. In accordance with the usual process, the parties have 14 days within which
to liaise as to the conditions to be imposed in relation
to this grant of
development approval.
54. In the event that the parties cannot agree, then the Appellants are at
liberty to apply to the Tribunal to determine the conditions
which should attach
to this approval.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (88.3 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter