URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WACIC/2021/24.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:57:23
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
D [2021] WACIC 24 (12 November 2021)
CRIMINAL INJURIES COMPENSATION
ASSESSOR OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
CRIMINAL INJURIES COMPENSATION ACT 2003
[2021] WACIC 24
C F HOLYOAK-ROBERTS
DELIVERED :
12 NOVEMBER 2021
FILE NO/S :
CIC 370 of 2020
CIC 2274 of 2020
Neglect claim - Assessment of award
Legislation:
Child Protection Act 2004
Child Welfare Act 1947
Children and Community Services Act
Criminal Injuries Compensation Act 2003
Guardianship and Administration Act 1990
Trustees Act 1941
Compensation granted
Representation:
Solicitors:
Ilberys Lawyers Pty Ltd
Case(s) referred to in decision(s):
[2021] WA CIC 20
Re Carter [1984] 4SR (WA) 219
[2016] WADC 74
for Decision
William Conlin under a power of delegation by the Public Trustee in accordance
Public Trustee Act 1941
, made an application
for compensation on behalf of D, who was born on 24 February 1999 (the
applicant). The application is for compensation
for injuries and losses
suffered by the applicant as a result of offences alleged to have been committed
between 1999 and 2013 as
a result of neglect and failure to protect by his
father, RE, and his mother, AE, as well as of common assault by his father. It
was alleged the injuries sustained by the applicant arose from a number of
separate incidents during the period claimed and when
the applicant was aged
between one and 14 years. On 5 July 2021 I awarded the applicant
$21,650 compensation in respect of incidents
which occurred between
1 January 1999 and 31 December 2003, allegedly perpetrated by his
mother (CIC 370/2020) and on the same date
made a separate award of
compensation for incidents which occurred between 24 February 1999 and
31 December 2013 in the sum of $41,650
for alleged offences perpetrated by
his father (CIC 2274/2020). The originating date in the awards is
incorrect and should have
read between February 2002 and 31 December 2003
with respect to his mother and between February 2002 and 31 December
2013 with respect
to his father and by these reasons I amend the awards to
reflect the correct dates. On the same date I refused the applicant's
application
for compensation for incidents allegedly perpetrated by his mother
after 2003 as I was not satisfied any alleged offences were committed
after this date. I find the applicant's mother had separated from the
applicant's father after 2003 and had separated from
the family in 2003, leaving
the care and responsibility of the applicant to the applicant's father. I made
no award with respect
to the alleged assaults (CIC 2273/2020) by the applicant's
father as I found the alleged assaults formed part of the overall picture
alleged neglect which was the subject of the award made in relation to the
father's conduct.
letter dated 6 July 2021 the applicant's solicitors, Ilberys, requested my
reasons for decision which are set out below.
application was made pursuant to
Criminal Injuries
Compensation Act 2003
(the Act) which authorises an assessor to award
compensation if satisfied the claimed injury and any claimed loss occurred as a
consequence
of the commission of an alleged offence. Alleged offence is defined
in section 3 of the Act to be a crime, misdemeanour or simple
which no person has been convicted.
to section 3 of the Act, I must be satisfied on the balance of
probabilities it is more probable than not an alleged offence
[2016] WADC 74).
The applicant bears the burden of
[1984] 4SR (WA) 219).
basis upon which the applicant claimed was set out in detailed submissions filed
in support of the application by the applicant's
solicitors. It was alleged in
those submissions the applicant sustained injuries as a result of separate
alleged offences occurring
between 1999 and 2013 as a result of the conduct of
his biological parents. In addition, it was alleged the applicant suffered
as a consequence of specific instances of common assault as well as
neglect and emotional abuse by his father. In general terms the
submissions
alleged the applicant was repeatedly violently punished, including being struck
across his legs and was unsupervised
wandering in unsafe places and living in a
cluttered house. It was also alleged the applicant witnessed incidents of family
and domestic
violence, perpetrated by his father against his mother causing him
trauma related injury and aggravating his behavioural issues.
It was submitted
the applicant's father failed to provide him with the basic necessities of life
by allowing the family home to
be in a poor state of hygiene, cluttered and
overwhelmed with rubbish. It was alleged those conditions in turn led to poor
and nutrition for the applicant who would often attend school hungry,
dishevelled and unwashed. It was also alleged his attendance
at school was
sporadic and he would also be on the street unsupervised whilst under the care
of his father. It was further alleged
the father's lack of supervision allowed
the applicant to watch pornography featuring incidents of deprivation of
liberty. It was
alleged his care was often left to his older sister who had
substance abuse problems and entered rehabilitation in 2009. It was
these allegations were evidence of neglect pursuant to
section 101
Children and Community
Services Act 2004
respect to alleged neglect by the applicant's mother, it was submitted she had
limited contact with the applicant. It was alleged
she was diagnosed with
borderline personality disorder and struggled with illicit drug use and between
1999 and 2007, failed to provide
the applicant with the basic necessities of
life with the family home consistently in a poor state of hygiene. It was
alleged the
applicant maintained some contact with his mother until 2010.
During this time, it was also alleged the applicant's mother accused
of raping her, which led to an argument witnessed by the applicant who it was
alleged was vicariously traumatised by his
mother's allegations, aggravating his
behavioural issues. It was alleged this was clear evidence of neglect and
emotional abuse pursuant
section 101
Children and Community
Services Act 2004
applicant's solicitors submitted at the age of 14 years in 2013, the
applicant was placed into care and was in a number of placements.
Once placed
in care, it was submitted he demonstrated significant developmental problems
which improved whilst in care.
support of the application, the Public Trustee on behalf of the applicant,
provided a number of documents as outlined in their
submissions including a
statement of evidence prepared on behalf of the applicant which was unsigned and
undated, an affidavit of
Lucy Sierbys, senior child protection worker, dated
5 December 2013, an affidavit of Susan Temple, principle Cable Beach
School dated 19 June 2015, an affidavit of Cameron Hardy senior
case manager Department of Housing, dated 25 June 2015 and an affidavit
Sandra Passmore, Broome Senior High School, dated 26 une 2015. In
relation to medical documents the following was submitted;
an autism spectrum
diagnostic assessment report dated 23 October 2002, a report from
Dr Shveter Patel developmental paediatrician
dated 20 June 2013, an
email of Lyn Jackson dated 22 October 2013, a report from Dr Siva
Bala consultant psychiatrist dated 29 December
2019 and an email from
Dr Siva Bala consultant psychiatrist dated 4 February 2020. In
relation to police documents, incident reports
dated 16 April 2010 and
1 January 2012 were provided together with an email from the WA Police
department dated 9 February 2012.
Documents relating to the applicant's
education were also provided. These included a student behaviour report dated
2012, reports from Broome Senior High School for 2012, 2014 and
2015 and Broome Senior High School suspension advice dated 21 May
number of documents from the Department of Communities were provided including
case notes dated 10 November 2008, 8 June
2010, 15 February 2012
and 26 May 2014, an email of Michelle Jones, senior child protection
worker, dated 30 July 2013, placement
referral dated 23 March 2014,
case plan dated 10 October 2014, and case plan review approved outcome
report dated 12 October 2015.
In addition, a tax invoice for the report
from Dr Siva Bala dated 19 December 2019 was also provided. Whilst I
have reviewed all
of these documents in reaching my determination I will only
make reference to some of them in these reasons.
to section 19(1) of the Act, I issued a notice to the Department of Communities
(DoC) for a genogram from 1999 to 2017 and
a living arrangement summary report
timeline of entry into and continuity of care including dates of placement
between 1999 and 2017.
I also issued a notice to Broome Senior High School for a
copy of all records relating to the applicant. Documents were received
DoC on 20 January 2021 and from Broome Senior High School on 2 March
2021. The documents from the DoC were extensive and
beyond the scope of the notice.
Circumstances giving rise to the claims on behalf of the applicant.
applicant was born in Malaysia on 24 February 1999 to his biological
parents RE and AE. According to a report from the Disability
Commission it was recorded the family lived in Malaysia until February 2002
when they moved to Marble Bar. This is consistent
with information contained in
the DoC's Placement Referral dated 23 March 2014 where it was recorded the
applicant was born in Malaysia
and moved to Australia (Marble Bar) as a toddler,
later moving to Broome. He was diagnosed with autism on 1 November 2002
was aged three years, though I note Dr Patel referred to a
diagnosis in 2003 of severe autism. Nothing in my view turns on the minor
discrepancy in the dates as to when the applicant was diagnosed with this
condition. Dr Patel, in a report dated 20 June 2013, said
applicant was almost completely non-verbal, except for saying a few simple
words. He was able to write a very simple sentence
at the age of fourteen and
was good at using a computer as he had developed elaborate computer skills. He
had interests in astronomy
and taught himself how to read maps. He was good at
remembering places and could travel by foot or bike for miles. In the past he
had collected king brown snakes which he kept in a tub in the garden until he
got bitten by one of them, and now collects chickens.
He was described as very
intelligent. At school he was attached to the special educational unit due to
his autism. He was described
as getting violent when he was bullied by local
children. Socially, his father was the primary care giver. The applicant's
was in poor health and struggled financially. His older sister had
developed a drug habit and would not go to school and neither
would his younger
brother. The applicant was described as having very good fine and gross motor
skills although basically no speech
and language ability. He was able to dress
and feed himself.
an affidavit of Lucy Sierby on behalf of the then Department for Child
Protection and Family Support, sworn on 12 December 2013,
it was identified
the applicant had two siblings, SRE who was a younger sibling to the applicant
born on 26 September 2001 and SE
who was an older sibling of the applicant
born on 2 September 1997. Ms Sierby described in that affidavit the
applicant's father
as a single parent who had been the main carer for the
children since 2003 which is consistent with information contained in the
Placement Referral dated 23 March 2014. At the time, he was 64 years
of age and suffered a variety of health issues, which
affected his functioning.
It was reported by his doctor, Dr James Edis the applicant's father was
severely disabled by his medical
conditions and suffered excessive fatigue. He
said he also suffered mental strain as a result of significant social stressors
being the primary carer for the children. The applicant's mother and
father separated in 2003. In the DoC's Placement Referral dated
2014, it was recorded the applicant's mother left the family home and was in and
out of the family for a number of years
and for the last two years had little to
no involvement with the children. There is a significant age disparity between
the applicant's
mother and father, his father having been born in 1949 and his
mother in 1978. On 20 November 2013 the DoC met with the applicant's
mother who explained she felt that the younger two children ought to be taken
into the care of the CEO of the DoC as she was struggling
with drug and alcohol
issues, mental health issues and homelessness, living in a hostel where there
was a lot of drug and alcohol
misuse. She agreed to remain in contact with the
DoC despite being unable to care for the children but she did not do so.
received from the DoC identified a number of issues with respect to the
applicant's father's care of the applicant since
2008. Between 28 August
2008 and 19 November 2008, the DoC became involved in home visits to
address a number of concerns including
the applicants lack of supervision,
wandering in unsafe places, a dirty unkempt and cluttered house, which had a
foul odour, the
applicant's sister undertaking substantial care for both the
applicant and his brother, which was not age appropriate, the applicant
siblings not being in school and domestic incidents between the applicant's
parents. For example, according to a detected
incidents report from the WA
Police, on 16 April 2010 it was recorded the applicant's father had custody
of the children and their
mother assisted with child support. On this occasion
they argued in front of the children about money whilst the applicant's mother
was visiting. She spoke with police about access and custody issues. On
10 November 2008 a DoC Case Worker recorded attending a
meeting with the
Disabilities team to discuss support the DoC could offer given the applicant was
prone to wandering off naked, the
house being messy and concerns for the
applicant's sister. It was also recorded in this case note the applicant's
mother had moved
back in the house causing problems for the applicant, his
father and his siblings, coming and going when she pleased. On 26 March
the DoC closed the case after a multi-agency plan of support was put in place.
In May 2010 a parent support worker who had
been working with the applicant
and his family called for a multi-agency meeting and in June 2010 the DoC
re-opened the family's
concerns and initiated assessments. They met with the
applicant's mother in June 2010 who admitted to drug use, describing an
forced marriage to the applicant's father, with him being physically
abusive towards her. A home visit was conducted on 8 June 2010
the safety and wellbeing of the applicant and his siblings. The applicant's
father disclosed he was embarrassed about the
state of the house, spoke at
length about the applicant having problems with collecting things and bringing
them back to the house,
and blaming him as the cause of clutter. He described
the applicant as out of control and due to his own poor health, he was unable
manage the applicant's behaviours. He told DoC workers the applicant's mother
had attended the night before to settle the children
to bed. He said she does
not help with any of the domestic chores when she attends. He told DoC workers
the applicant's mother
had not been around a lot because the children had found
illicit drugs at her house which he was unhappy about. He said she also
to care for the children when he went to hospital as he would not transfer their
Centrelink payments to her. He told workers
he and the applicant's mother had
broken up in 2007 as a result of her being on drugs and breaking relationship
boundaries. I noted
previously, Ms Sierby stated in her affidavit the
applicant's father had been the children's main carer since 2003, consistent
information recorded in the DoC's Placement Referral dated 23 March
2014. The applicant's father asserted the applicant's mother
physically violent towards him, hitting him over the head with a chair four days
before he was admitted to hospital for
a heart attack. The applicant's mother
told the children on this occasion the applicant's father had raped her which
the applicant's
father believed related to when they first had sexual relations
when they were living in Malaysia.
from the DoC established the DoC financed the removal of rubbish from the yard
and provided vacation care for the children
over the school holidays. When
engaging with the applicant's father in the home, the smell of excrement was
observed which the applicant's
father blamed on the applicant's sibling not
cleaning the cat litter tray. Concerns were raised about the applicant's sister
day to day care of her brothers beyond that which was age appropriate,
the applicant not being provided with appropriate care and
supervision which he
required due to his autism, the uninhabitable nature of the family home, and the
a reasonable standard. The house was cleaned in
June 2010 although the applicant's father continued to complain about being
to manage day to day domestic duties. There were allegations of
inappropriate behaviour by others such as a pornographic home movie
by a third party, whilst the children were on the beach due to lack of
supervision by the applicant's father. In 2010
concerns were raised for lack of
school attendance by the applicant and his brother and with the applicant
presenting to school as
very dirty with unwashed hair. Despite intervention,
the home again deteriorated, and the applicant's behaviour also deteriorated
with him showing signs of aggression towards staff members at childcare,
attempting to abscond, placing himself at risk and playing
with his penis in
view of other children. The DoC was also contacted in 2011 by the principal of
the primary school expressing concern
the applicant was regularly seen wandering
the street or riding his bike unsupervised and a long way from home, despite
constant supervision due to his autism. He was having violent
outbursts at school and attending the home of his education assistant
night. He was also observed to be taking all his clothes off at school to get a
reaction from staff.
February 2012 the DoC received a mandatory report advising the applicant
had a video camera on which it was recorded the applicant
naked, bending over
and engaging in inappropriate activities. The WAPOL Detected Incident Report
relating to this matter recorded
the applicant brought a video camera to school
and his Education Assistant had cause to look at the footage on 6 February
It was recorded the footage displayed a person believed to be the
applicant bending over displaying his bottom to the camera, engaging
inappropriate conduct in front of the camera. It was observed this video
appeared to be recorded by a person other than the applicant,
though after a
police investigation no sexual abuse was substantiated.
a case note dated 15 February 2012 it was recorded the applicant's father
attended DoC for a meeting regarding this issue. The
applicant's mother did not
attend as his father said he could not rouse her from sleep. It is unclear to me
whether she was living
in the applicant's household at the time. She was later
transported to the DoC by a caseworker before the meeting commenced. The
recorded material was discussed and the applicant's parents disclosed an
additional incident. DoC raised issues regarding the applicant
unsupervised.
a plan was devised for the applicant's father to provide adequate supervision to
the applicant and his siblings and for
his siblings to undergo protective
behaviours training. When the applicant's father was flown to Perth for medical
treatment in
2013, the applicant and his brother were placed in respite care and
a support worker was paid to clean the family home. Whilst doing
support worker was bitten by a snake and previously there had been a number of
snakes in the home which the applicant had
caught and brought home as pets. The
applicant's siblings were also experiencing symptoms of stress including his
sister smoking
marijuana and drinking alcohol to excess and his brother
experiencing frequent headaches. In 2013, additional concerns over the
applicant's inappropriate sexualised behaviour were raised, with a support
worker allegedly observing the applicant watching a pornographic
DVD involving
deprivation of liberty and allegedly masturbating whilst doing so. In
June 2013, the applicant's sister moved to residential
rehabilitation. In
August 2013, concerns were raised around the applicant spending nights
camping out away from home, coming to
school the following day hungry, being
sleep deprived and dirty, living in uninhabitable home conditions for which the
applicant's
father blamed the children and poor school attendance. There was
also concern about the emotional impact of the applicant hearing
saying he wanted to die, the applicant's sexualised inappropriate behaviours,
poor parenting, chaotic home with a lack
of structure and routine, and the
applicant's father's use of corporal punishment including self-reporting he had
hit his younger
son across the legs with a cable because he was out playing with
friends instead of assisting him at home. The applicant's father
children for the home conditions and said their mother should be there to clean
the house and take care of him and the
children. He described his youngest son
as lazy and the applicant as difficult and violent. He was unwilling to look at
preventative
strategies. These concerns about the conditions upon which the
applicant and his brother lived continued until the applicant and
his brother
were placed into provisional protection and care pursuant to
Children and Community
Services Act 2004
on 6 December 2013.
examined the information provided to me, it was evident the applicant's father
and mother separated in 2003 with his mother
having very little and sporadic
there was occasional
periodic contact between the applicant's mother and the
children but not enough to satisfy me she had the care or control of them.
therefore satisfied on the information available to me the applicant's mother
had abandoned the home and the family in about
2003, engaging in periodic
Extension of time
to section 9 of the Act an application for compensation must be made within
three years after the date on which the offence
to which it relates was
committed or of more than one, the date on which the last of the offences was
committed. An assessor may
allow an application for compensation after the
three year period if it is just to do so. On the information available to me
last of the offences occurred before the applicant and his brother were
taken into provisional protection and care on 6 December
2013. Therefore,
the applicant's application ought to have been lodged on or before
December 2016. The application was not lodged
until 18 February 2020
and therefore an extension of time is required. Having regard to the
circumstance of the incidents, the applicant's
age and his pre-existing
vulnerabilities particularly his autism, and the fact an order of the State
Administrative Tribunal (SAT)
appointing the Public Trustee as the applicant's
plenary administrator and SLP as the applicant's guardian, pursuant to the
Guardianship and Administration Act
was not made until 23 March 2017, I was satisfied it was just
to extend time within which the applicant could bring his
application.
Neglect Principles
relation to the general principles regarding neglect claims I rely on the
outline of the legislation and case law by Assessor
[2021] WA CIC 20.
From the information available to me I have jurisdiction to
consider the applicant's alleged neglect claims from 2002 (when the
family moved
to Western Australia from Malaysia). The time period for the claim arising for
alleged neglect by the applicant's parents
ceased when the applicant was taken
into provisional care in December 2013. For the period 2002 to
1 March 2006, the
Child Welfare Act 1947
applied and for the period
2 March 2006 to when they were taken into care in 2013, the
Children and
Community Services Act 2004
applied. Whilst there is reference to
inappropriate corporal punishment by the applicant's father to the applicant and
his siblings
during the period he is alleged to have been neglected, I did not
consider there was sufficient specificity provided in relation
to those alleged
offences to warrant a separate award of compensation based on allegations of
assault. I therefore considered the
applicant's father's conduct in physically
punishing the applicant to be part of the overall neglect claim between the
period specified.
submitted by the applicant's solicitors together with the documents obtained
from the DoC provided a compelling summary
of the circumstances and illustrated
a number of particulars of neglect during the time the DoC were involved with
the applicant's
family. In particular, the applicant's poor living conditions,
lack of nutrition, lack of appropriate supervision, unkempt appearance,
structure, inappropriate punishment, ill treatment, physical, emotional and
psychological abuse and generally not being provided
with the necessities of
life were sufficient to satisfy me alleged offences pursuant to the relevant
legislation to which I have
referred were constituted. Whilst I had no direct
evidence in the information available to me the applicant was subject to these
conditions and experiences prior to the DoC's involvement, I inferred the
conditions under which the applicant was living had existed
since his birth in
1999 and certainly since his time in Australia. I was therefore satisfied on
the information available to me
the applicant suffered neglect by his mother for
which I have jurisdiction between 2002 and 2003 and at the hands of his father
2002 until 2013 when he was taken into provisional care.
Assessment of the applicant's application
assessment of the applicant's application is conducted against the background of
his diagnosis of severe autism. There is no
suggestion this diagnosis was in
any way caused by or related to the alleged neglect perpetrated by his parents.
In a report from
Dr Bala dated 29 December 2019, it was reported the
applicant suffered from autism spectrum disorder with accompanying intellectual
and language impairment. He said this was a neurocognitive disorder manifesting
early in life characterised by developmental deficits
that led to impairments of
personal, social, academic, and occupational functioning. Dr Bala concluded
the development of that disorder
was unrelated to the upbringing by his parents
although it was worsened by the family environment. He said the applicant
experienced
significant attachment difficulties and neglect in childhood which
affected his capacity to speak, self-regulate his emotions, self-care
exhibit appropriate behaviours. He concluded the applicant suffered from a
reactive attachment disorder in childhood due to the
severe neglect by his
parents classified as a psychiatric injury rather than a cognitive disorder
arising from the family environment.
Since the death of his father and being
under the care of others it was noted there was a significant improvement in the
applicant's
psychiatric presentation because he had been provided with
stability, security and a predictable routine. Dr Bala recorded the
was unable to provide any meaningful information given his
intellectual disability and minimal speech. He was only able to vocalise
one-word replies, repeating stock phrases rather than responding personally. He
could not provide meaningful comment for the
purposes of the assessment and
Dr Bala had to rely entirely on collateral information to assess his mental
concluded the applicant had a lifelong diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder
with intellectual impairment. He experienced
significant emotional and physical
neglect as a child given the breakdown of the relationship between his parents
and having been
abandoned by his mother, who was using illicit substances. The
physical environment of the house with his father was marked by neglect,
hoarding, unhygienic conditions, lack of appropriate boundaries, and the
applicant having been cared for by his siblings. He received
inadequate care
and treatment, demonstrated a variety of disinhibited behaviours, and suffered
psychological injury during the time
he was in the care of his parents, strongly
suggestive of a reactive attachment disorder. Alternative diagnoses included
adjustment disorder, posttraumatic stress disorder, and/or attention
deficit hyperactivity disorder. His cognitive impairment was
attributable to his autism spectrum disorder although childhood attachment
disorder and social deprivation contributed to
some extent.
current carer Ms P said in an affidavit dated 26 June 2015, she was
employed by Broome Senior High School as Head of Learning
Area, teaching and
coordinating students with specialised educational needs. It was in that
capacity she met the applicant in 2011
to prepare him for entering high school.
She recalled at the time he exhibited significant behavioural problems and she
was involved
in a year-long transition from primary to high school. She also
acted as the applicant's emergency carer. She described a period
of improvement
for the applicant whilst in her care, supporting the conclusion his pre-existing
condition was attributable to his
poor family conditions.
accepted the applicant suffered significant psychological sequela as a result of
the lack of care by his parents superimposed over
a pre-existing severe autism
spectrum disorder diagnosis unrelated to the conduct of his parents. I
considered an appropriate award
for injuries suffered by the applicant to be
$60,000, $20,000 attributable to his mother and $40,000 attributable to his
The application for compensation was made for incidents which occurred
between 1999 and 2013. The applicant was born in Malaysia
and resided there
until 2002. As such, I had no jurisdiction to award compensation from the date
of his birth until 2002 when they
arrived in Australia. I therefore awarded the
applicant the sum of $20,000 for injuries relating to the conduct of his mother
2002 and end 2003. In addition, I awarded the applicant the sum of
$40,000 for injuries caused by his father between 2002 and December
2013 when he
was taken into DoC care. The applicant also made a claim for the report from
Dr Bala in the sum of $3,300. I attributed
50% of the cost to the claim
against the applicant's mother and 50% against his father. I therefore awarded
the applicant $21,650
for the conduct of his mother and $41,650 for the conduct
of his father.
I certify that the preceding paragraph(s)
comprise the reasons for decision of the Criminal Injuries Compensation Assessor
C F Holyoak-Roberts, CHIEF ASSESSOR OF CRIMINAL INJURIES COMPENSATION
12 NOVEMBER 2021
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (233 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter