JACKSON -v- NATIONAL AUSTRALIA BANK LIMITED [2025] WASCA 80 (23 May 2025)
COURT OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
THE COURT OF APPEAL
-v- NATIONAL AUSTRALIA BANK LIMITED
[2025] WASCA 80
DELIVERED :
PUBLISHED :
CACV 11 of 2025
EDWARD STANSMORE JACKSON
MERVYN JACKSON
FRANCIS JACKSON
ESTATE OF GARRY JAMES JACKSON
GAIL JACKSON
ANNE JACKSON
AUSTRALIA BANK LIMITED
APPEAL FROM:
COURT OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
AUSTRALIA BANK LIMITED -v- JACKSON
[2025] WASC 8
CIV 2150 of 2023
Catchwords:
- Mortgage recovery action - Appeal from summary judgment - Whether appeal
should be dismissed on basis of none of the grounds
having a reasonable prospect
of succeeding - Turns on own facts
Legislation:
Court (Court of Appeal) Rules 2005
r 43(2)(f),
r 43(2)(g)(i)
Representation:
First Appellant
No appearance
Third Appellant
No appearance
No appearance
Fifth Appellant
Sixth Appellant
No appearance
Solicitors:
First Appellant
Third Appellant
Fifth Appellant
Sixth Appellant
Norton Rose Fulbright
referred to in decision(s):
OF THE COURT
matter came before the court on 23 May 2025 pursuant to a Registrar's
Notice to Attend dated 15 April 2025. The notice raised
consideration:
the court should strike out any ground of appeal.
the appeal should be dismissed on the basis that none of the grounds of appeal
has a reasonable prospect of succeeding.
hearing from the spokesperson for the appellants, and considering the
appellant's case, we were satisfied that the appeal should
be dismissed pursuant
to r 43(2)(g)(i) of the
Supreme Court
(Court of Appeal) Rules 2005
(WA). We made orders accordingly and said
that we would provide written reasons for those orders as soon as practicable.
are our reasons for the orders made dismissing the
appellants traded together as
Jackson Bros.
Three of the appellants - the first, second and third appellants - were at all
material times the registered proprietors of a Property.
The Property is
comprised of that land being lot 8669 on deposited plan 201627 (the
whole of the land described in certificate of
title volume 1986
folio 76) and lot 8678 on deposited plan 201627 (the whole of the
land described in certificate of title volume
1986 folio 78). The
respondent bank provided facilities and loaned money to Jackson Bros from
time to time.
a writ of summons dated 9 October 2023 the respondent bank commenced
recovery proceedings against the appellants.
respondent sought payment of an amount allegedly owing pursuant to a Letter of
Offer (said to be an amount of $803,523.45 as
at 4 October 2023) and
delivery up of vacant possession of the Property. The respondent claimed that,
by the Letter of Offer, the
respondent made two Facilities available to the
appellants - an Overdraft with a facility limit of $100,000 and a Business
a facility limit of $675,000 (later increased to $774,000).
After various extensions the Facilities were repayable on 28 February
The respondent further claimed that repayment of the loans pursuant to the
Letter of Offer was secured by a Mortgage dated
5 February 1990 (being
Mortgage E313667) which encumbered the Property.
were alleged to have occurred in February 2022 and March 2023 as a
result of which the respondent bank claimed to be entitled
to possession of the
respondent bank brought an application for summary judgment pursuant to
O 14 of the
Rules of the Supreme Court
(WA) (RSC) by chamber summons filed 16 November 2023. The
application was supported by an affidavit of Jeffrey Pontifex affirmed
16 November 2023 and the affidavits of Nicholas White sworn
7 March 2024 and 3 April 2024. Mr Pontifex is an officer of the
bank. Mr White is a solicitor employed by the respondent's
solicitors.
was some doubt about whether the summary judgment application was brought within
the 21‑day period allowed under O 14
r 1(1) RSC. To deal with
the possibility that the application was out of time the chamber summons dated
16 November 2023 sought
leave to apply.
appellants filed a defence on 10 November 2023 and subsequently, on
4 December 2023, filed a defence and counterclaim in substitution
original defence. On 19 December 2023 the respondent filed a further
chamber summons. This sought summary judgment, pursuant
to O 16 RSC, in
respect of the counterclaim. In the alternative the respondent sought orders
striking out the counterclaim pursuant
to O 20 r 19 RSC. The
defendant's summary judgment application was supported by an affidavit of
Mr Pontifex affirmed 18 December
opposing the respondent bank's applications, the appellants relied on an
affidavit sworn by the first appellant on 22 February
2024. The appellants
were also permitted to adduce certain documentary evidence at the hearing of the
applications. It is not necessary
to set out all that was deposed to in the
first appellant's affidavit. However, given the grounds of appeal, it should be
that the first appellant did depose as follows at
I say that Mortgage E313667, being annexure JDP6 at pages 67 to 70 is
not a true copy of the Mortgage E313667 on file at Landgate,
Annexed hereto and
marked 'KESJ3'. There are material differences between both
'KESJ‑3' is a four‑page document appearing at pages
62 ‑ 65 of the first appellant's affidavit. It is
apparent from
the imprint to the document that it is a search obtained on 27 February
2023 from the records maintained by the Registrar
of Titles pertaining to
Mortgage E313667. Annexure 'JDP‑6' is an annexure to Mr Pontifex's
affidavit affirmed 16 November
2023 appearing at pages
66 ‑ 70 of that affidavit. This appears to be a reproduction of
the respondent's own documentary record
of Mortgage E313667 obtained by the
respondent on 18 October 2019 through a third‑party records and
information manager known
as ZircoDATA. By visual comparison of the two
documents it is obvious that the copy document at annexure 'JDP‑6' is the
as the copy document at annexure 'KESJ‑3' but for (1) different
imprints indicating the provenance of the documents; and (2)
'upstamping' and certain other notations on the document at 'JDP‑6'. We
will say more about these notations when
we deal with grounds 3
respondent bank's applications were heard by Master Russell on 11 and
30 April 2024. Judgment was reserved. The master handed
down written
reasons for decision on 14 January 2025:
National Australia Bank
In summary the master
O 14 RSC application for summary judgment was filed within 21 days
after compliant memorandum of appearances were filed. However,
avoidance of doubt, the respondent should have leave to bring the application in
any event [63] ‑ [64], [148](a).
respondent had complied with the procedural requirements for the O 14 RSC
application. So too the essential elements of the respondent's
cause of action
had been verified. There was a prima facie case that the respondent was
entitled to recover the amount due and owing
under the Facilities and the order
sought for possession of the Property [67] ‑ [69],
matters raised by the appellants did not give rise to an arguable defence or a
triable issue. Nor was there any other reason
why there should be a trial of
the action [71] ‑ [95], [148](c). (We will come back to the
matters raised by the appellants
in this respect so far as they are relevant in
dealing with the grounds of appeal.) So too the matters raised by the
appellants,
by way of counterclaim, did not give rise to a viable defence. The
position could not be improved with any amendment. Nor did the
evidence adduced
reveal facts which, if properly pleaded, could form an arguable defence to the
respondent's claim [134] ‑
was a clear case in which it was appropriate to enter summary judgment on the
respondent's claims [148](d).
to the O 16 RSC application, the respondent had a good defence on the
merits and the counterclaim could not succeed; it was not
an appropriate case to
proceed to trial and should be summarily dismissed [159], [161],
[192] ‑ [193]. In any event, it was
a clear case where the
claims advanced in the counterclaim were statute‑barred, due to the
expiration of the relevant limitation
period, and on that basis also the
counterclaim should not be permitted to proceed to trial
[163] ‑ [193].
Accordingly,
both the O 14 RSC application and the O 16 RSC application were to be
allowed and judgment was to be entered for the
respondent bank against the
appellants. The master also foreshadowed making orders for the first, second
and third appellants to
deliver up vacant possession of the Property to the
respondent [8], [149], [193], [199].
master gave the respondent bank an opportunity to update the amount due and
payable under the Facilities [200]. Thereafter,
on 31 January 2025, the
master made orders
[respondent] has leave pursuant to Order 14
of the Rules of
the Supreme Court 1971 (WA) (RSC) to bring the O 14 Summary Judgment
Application.
to Order 14 rule 3(1) RSC, judgment is entered for the [respondent]
against the [appellants].
28 February 2025, the first, second and third [respondents] are to deliver
up to the [appellant] vacant possession of [the Property].
is entered for the [respondent] against the [appellants] in the amount
(a) $789,352.35 plus interest from 16 January 2025 until payment in
accordance with and at the rates provided by the [Letter of Offer];
(b) $118,500.70 plus interest from 16 January 2025 until payment in
accordance with and at the rates provided by the [Letter of
to Order 16 rule 1 RSC, judgment is entered for the [respondent]
against each of the [appellants] in relation to the amended
counterclaim filed
on 4 December 2023 (Counterclaim).
Counterclaim is dismissed.
[appellants] are to pay the [respondent's] costs of the action, and of the
Applications, on a solicitor and own client basis,
to be taxed if not
appellants appealed from the primary court's orders made 31 January 2025 by
an appeal notice filed 19 February 2025. The appeal
is from all of the
orders made 31 January 2025. However, the grounds of appeal in the
appellant's case are confined to a challenge
to the master's reasons in respect
of the orders for summary judgment on the respondent bank's application pursuant
to O 14 RSC.
It is, in the circumstances, not necessary to say anything
more about the orders for summary judgment on the appellants' counterclaim
pursuant to O 16 RSC.
grounds of appeal are reproduced in full in the annexure to these reasons. In
substance, the grounds of appeal raise the following
the master in error at primary reasons [77] in finding that the 'Plaintiff
Credit Agreement' (referred to by the master as the
'Letter of Offer') is a loan
agreement? (Ground 1)
the master in error at primary reasons [77] in finding that the Plaintiff Credit
Agreement (ie the Letter of Offer) is not an instrument
within the meaning
and for the purpose of
Transfer of Land Act 1893
(WA) (TLA)?
the master in error at primary reasons [84] in finding that the 'Plaintiff
Mortgage Document' (referred to by the master as the
'Mortgage') is properly
registered in compliance with
of the TLA and is valid and enforceable?
the master in error at primary reasons [81] by not correctly determining the
validity of the Plaintiff Mortgage Document (ie the
the master in error at primary reasons [45] in finding that the Mortgage secures
the Facilities? (Ground 5)
the master in error at primary reasons [75] in finding that the Mortgage is the
Security described in the Other Details section
of the Letter of Offer?
and 2 concern the Letter of Offer. Grounds 3 and 4 concern the Mortgage.
Grounds 5 and 6 concern whether repayment of
the Facilities was secured by
the Mortgage. However, as will be seen, the appellants' argument in support of
grounds 5 and 6 is
premised on the appellants' argument concerning the
The nature of the hearing
Registrar's Notice to Attend invoked r 43(2)(f) and r 43(2)(g)(i) of
Supreme Court (Court of Appeal)
. Those rules confirm the court's
(f) to strike out any ground of appeal that does not have a reasonable prospect
of succeeding or does not comply with these rules
or any order made under
(g) to dismiss the appeal if:
(i) none of the grounds of appeal has a reasonable prospect of
succeeding[.]
purpose of these rules is to weed out unmeritorious appeals:
In de Braekt v
Legal Profession Complaints
rules are directed to grounds of appeal that do not have a 'reasonable prospect
of succeeding'. In that
ground of appeal has a reasonable prospect of succeeding if it has a rational
and logical prospect of succeeding, ie it would not
be irrational, fanciful
or absurd to envisage the ground succeeding. The ground must have a 'real
prospect' of success:
Samuels v The State of
In de Braekt v Legal
Profession Complaints Committee
Farrant v Westpac Banking
Corporation
the court is to strike out a ground as not having a reasonable prospect of
succeeding, or is to dismiss an appeal on the basis
that none of the grounds has
a reasonable prospect of succeeding, the court must be positively satisfied that
the ground, or all
of the grounds, lacks or lack a rational and logical prospect
of succeeding:
Westpac Banking Corporation
ground of appeal does not have a reasonable prospect of succeeding simply
because, standing alone, it might be upheld. The ground
must allege material
error. A ground of appeal will only have a reasonable prospect of succeeding
where, if upheld, the ground -
either by itself or in combination with other
grounds that have a rational and logical prospect of succeeding - would result
primary court's judgment or order being disturbed:
Farrant v Westpac Banking
Corporation
The affidavit of the first appellant sworn 23 May
the hearing on 23 May 2025 the appellants sought to adduce additional
evidence on the appeal being an affidavit of the first appellant
23 May 2025. The first appellant handed up the affidavit in the course of
his oral submissions.
first appellant's affidavit attached a copy of what was deposed to be a true
copy of the original Letter of Offer. The first
appellant compared this version
of the Letter of Offer to the version of the Letter of Offer that is attached as
attachment 'JDP‑2'
to Mr Pontifex's affidavit affirmed
16 November 2023. The first appellant deposed that the version of the
Letter of Offer provided
to the court on behalf of the respondent bank is
different to the original Letter of Offer. The first appellant stated that
had been made to the original Letter of Offer without the knowledge or
consent of the appellants and then represented by the respondent
to the court as
evidence of the original and current agreement. The first appellant asserted
that the respondent's version of the
Letter of Offer was used to obtain a
judgment of the court fraudulently.
submissions to the court, the first appellant stated that the original Letter of
Offer, a copy of which had been attached to his
affidavit of 23 May 2025,
had been located the previous day in archives.
for the respondent bank opposed leave being granted to rely on the first
appellant's affidavit sworn 23 May 2025 as additional
evidence in the
appeal. Counsel expressed doubts as to the provenance of the version of the
Letter of Offer as attached to the first
appellant's affidavit. Counsel pointed
out that the respondent bank was disadvantaged by not being able to consider
issues as to
provenance insofar as the respondent first became aware of the
affidavit on it being handed up in the course of the hearing before
have compared the version of the Letter of Offer that is attached to the first
appellant's affidavit with the version of the Letter
of Offer that is annexure
'JDP‑2'. There are differences. The cover page of the version attached
the first appellant's affidavit
appears to contain the first appellant's
notations. There are minor formatting differences at page 3, page 26
(cl 14.2, cl 14.4)
and page 27 (cl 16.4, cl 17,
cl 17.1). There is one substantive difference. This is in relation to
cl 16.1 concerning changes to
the agreement. The version attached to the
first appellant's affidavit provides for changes to the agreement by the
acting reasonably. The
version at attachment 'JDP‑2' provides for changes to the agreement by the
respondent bank
acting reasonably.
There are minor consequential differences at cl 16.2(a) as to notification
of any change.
appellants did not suggest that the differences to cl 16.1 and
cl 16.2(a) had any consequences for their liability to the respondent
in respect of the Overdraft or the Business Loan under the Letter of Offer.
informed the parties that we would address the reception of the first
appellant's affidavit sworn 23 May 2025 as part of the court's
the matter before the court. We would not receive the first appellant's
affidavit as additional evidence in the appeal.
It is not in the interests of
justice to do so. There is a strong public interest in the finality of
litigation. The appellants
have not attempted to establish that the version of
the Letter of Offer attached to the first appellant's affidavit could not have
been discovered with reasonable diligence prior to the hearing before the
master. That seems unlikely to be the case since the document
is said to have
been located in the appellants' archives. Nor is there a significant
possibility that, had the affidavit been adduced
in the primary proceedings
before the master, it would have led to a different result. No contention was
advanced that the appellants'
indebtedness to the respondent would have been any
different had the relevant terms of the Facilities been those terms in the
of the Letter of Offer attached to the first appellant's affidavit sworn
23 May 2025. Finally, the further evidence did not advance
appellants' grounds of appeal in a material way.
first appellant's affidavit sworn 23 May 2025 will be included in the
court's file so that it may be considered if the matter
goes further. It has
not, however, been admitted as additional evidence on the
Grounds 1 and 2 - the challenge to the findings
concerning the Letter of Offer
respondent claimed that the Letter of Offer constituted a written loan agreement
by which it made the Facilities available to
the appellants. In opposing the
application under O 14 RSC the appellants said that the Letter of Offer was
not registered under
the TLA. The appellants contended that, in the absence of
registration,
of the TLA meant that the Letter of Offer was not
master reproduced
of the TLA. This
Instruments
not effectual until registered
instrument until registered in manner herein provided shall be effectual to pass
any estate or interest in any land under the operation
of this Act or to render
such land liable to any mortgage or charge or to make any dealing in respect of
Crown land effective, as
the case requires; but upon such registration the
estate or interest comprised in the instrument shall pass or as the case may be
the land shall become liable in manner and subject to the covenants and
conditions set forth and specified in the instrument or by
this Act declared to
be implied in instruments of a like nature, or the dealing in respect of Crown
land is made effective, as the
case required.
master then held:
The Letter of Offer is a loan agreement. It is not a mortgage or an instrument
by which any estate or interest in land is passed,
or one to which
the TLA applies and is not required to be registered with Landgate
challenges the finding that the Letter of Offer is a loan agreement.
Ground 2 challenges the finding that the Letter of
Offer is not an
instrument. It should, however, be understood that this misstates the master's
actual finding. The gravamen of
the finding reproduced at [__] above is that
the Letter of Offer is not a 'mortgage or instrument' to which
TLA applies - not being, for example, a mortgage or instrument by which any
estate or interest in land is passed.
appellants' argument in support of grounds 1 and 2 is adequately
summarised in the particulars to the grounds as reproduced in
the annexure to
these reasons.
Letter of Offer is reproduced at annexure 'JDP‑2' to Mr Pontifex's
affidavit affirmed 16 November 2023 (appearing at pages
15 ‑ 55 of that affidavit). It takes the form of a covering
letter dated 20 January 2017, a 'business letter of offer' dated
20 January 2017, terms and conditions, the respondent's offer and the
customer's acceptance. The respondent's offer has been signed
by an authorised
officer on behalf of the respondent. The customer's acceptance has been signed
by the appellants. It is plain
that, when signed by the appellants as the
'customer', the Letter of Offer takes effect as an agreement. The Letter of
Offer states
as much throughout the document. The matter is put beyond argument
by the terms of the offer and acceptance.
Relevantly,
the respondent states at page 38 of the Letter of
NAB offers to make available to you each Facility on the terms and conditions
set out in this Agreement.
appellants' acceptance states that, by indicating an intention to accept the
offer, the appellants 'accept the Agreement' (Letter
Letter of Offer is to be characterised as an agreement for a loan. The
respondent offers to make two Facilities available to
the appellants - the
Overdraft with a facility limit of $100,000 and the Business Loan with a
facility limit of $675,000. The facility
details and terms and conditions
provide for rights and obligations that are commonly found in a loan agreement.
There is, for example,
provision for advances, redraws and repayment.
regard to its purpose and object, as well as its terms, the master was correct
to characterise the Letter of Offer as a loan
too the master was correct to hold that the Letter of Offer was not required to
be registered under the TLA to be effectual.
Whether or not the Loan Agreement
might meet a dictionary definition of the term 'instrument' - or even the
TLA definition of the term 'instrument' - is beside the point.
of the TLA has a confined operation. It applies so that,
relevantly, an instrument is not effectual to pass any estate or interest
land or render land liable to a mortgage or charge until the instrument is
registered in the manner provided by the TLA. But,
as the master recognised,
the Letter of Offer neither passed any estate or interest in the Property nor
rendered the Property liable
to any mortgage or charge. The Letter of Offer did
not need to do so given that the Property was mortgaged by the Mortgage.
Accordingly,
while it was accepted by the respondent that the Letter of Offer
was not registered under the TLA, that circumstance was of no consequence
the respondent's monetary claim under the Letter of Offer. And, so far as the
respondent sought vacant possession of the Property,
it was enough that the
Mortgage was registered under the TLA.
and 2 do not have a reasonable prospect of
succeeding.
Grounds 3 and 4 - the challenge to the findings
concerning the Mortgage
and 4 relate to the Mortgage.
the master, the appellants contended that the Mortgage was an unregistered
instrument that could not be relied on as it breached
of the TLA and
was otherwise invalid [74](c). The master recorded that the appellants claimed
the Mortgage to be invalid and unenforceable
[78] ‑ [79]:
volume and folio numbers had been cancelled.
respondent had altered their unregistered mortgage by the addition of parties
and volume and folio numbers.
Mortgage was an unregistered instrument that could not be relied on because it
of the TLA.
Mortgage was invalid because no monetary amount was stated in the instrument
registered with the Registrar of Titles.
master made a finding that there was no requirement that the Mortgage state a
monetary amount [83]. The master also made findings
There is no evidence to support the [appellants'] submission to the effect that
the signatures on the Mortgage are not the [appellants'],
and no reason to doubt
Mr Pontifex's evidence to the effect that a true copy of the Mortgage is
attached to the First Pontifex Affidavit
[ie the affidavit sworn
16 November 2023] [81].
I am satisfied that the Mortgage is properly registered in compliance with
of the TLA and is valid and enforceable [84].
challenges the first of those findings; ground 3 challenges the second of
those findings. The challenge by ground 4 is
only to the finding proving
the Mortgage. There is no challenge to the finding that there is no evidence to
support the submission
that the signatures on the Mortgage are not the first,
second and third appellants' signatures. That finding is plainly correct
that there is no such evidence in the first appellants' affidavit sworn
22 February 2024.
substance the appellants challenge whether the respondent bank satisfactorily
established the existence and registration of the
Mortgage that was said to
encumber the Property as security for repayment of the Facilities. That
challenge is in the context of
the respondent's O 14 RSC summary judgment
application. Accordingly, it was incumbent on the respondent to establish that,
as the appellants sought to impugn the existence and the efficacy of the
Mortgage, this was the clearest of cases where there was
a high degree of
certainty about the ultimate outcome of the proceedings if they were to go to
trial. It had to be clear that there
was no real question to be tried.
particulars in support of ground 3 contend that there is no evidence - or
that the respondent has not tendered evidence - of
a registered mortgage for the
and/or s 105 of the TLA. In written submissions in
support of ground 3 the appellants made the same argument. The appellants
acknowledged
that the respondent had produced a document entitled 'Mortgage'.
The appellants said, however, that this document had not been proved
properly registered mortgage under and in compliance with the TLA. That, in
substance, was also the argument advanced
in support of ground 4. The
appellants said that the respondent did not tender its document entitled
'Mortgage' as being a true
copy of the Mortgage and did not adduce evidence that
this was the instrument registered with the Registrar of Titles under the TLA.
The appellants relied on the document reproduced at annexure 'KESJ‑3' to
the first appellant's affidavit and pointed to the
differences between this
document and the document at annexure 'JDP‑6' to Mr Pontifex's
affidavit affirmed 16 November 2023
as adduced by the respondent.
documentary evidence before the master established the following matters
conclusively:
Property, of which the first, second and third appellants are the registered
proprietors of the estate in fee simple, is comprised
of two certificates of
title being:
(a) Lot 8669 on deposited plan 201627 (the land described in certificate of
title volume 1986 folio 76) (see annexure 'JDP‑4');
(b) Lot 8678 on deposited plan 201627 (the land described in certificate of
title volume 1986 folio 78) (see annexure
Property is encumbered by Mortgage E313667 of which the respondent is the
registered proprietor (see annexures 'JDP‑4' and
Mortgage E313667
was registered under the TLA against the Property on 12 March 1990 (see
annexures 'JDP‑4' and 'JDP‑5').
(The fact that
Mortgage E313667 is registered under the TLA is also established by
annexure 'KESJ‑3' and par 13 of the first
appellant's affidavit sworn
22 February 2024.)
Mortgage E313667
is in the form of the documents adduced in evidence by the appellants and the
respondent (see annexure 'JDP‑6'
and annexure
this point it is necessary to address the differences between the documents
reproduced at annexure 'JDP‑6' and annexure
one level the differences do not matter to the master's ultimate conclusion.
The certificates of title prove that the Property
is encumbered by
Mortgage E313667 in favour of the respondent. And, even though the
appellants take issue with the document at annexure
'JDP‑6', the
appellants' own evidence establishes that Mortgage E313667 was registered
under the TLA on 12 March 1990. However,
given what is raised by
grounds 3 and 4, it is as well to address the differences and explain
why the differences are of no consequence
for the purpose of the respondent
bank's claim.
differences between the documents arise from their immediate provenance - the
document at annexure 'KESJ‑3' reproduces
a search of the Registrar of
Titles' records in relation to Mortgage E313667 whereas the document at
annexure 'JDP‑6' reproduces
the copy of Mortgage E313667 maintained
in the respondent's records. In that respect annexure 'JDP‑6' contains
notations dealing
with events after the registration of Mortgage E313667
with the Registrar of Titles on 12 March 1990. For example, 'JDP‑6'
contains notations dealing with upstamping on various dates including
11 February 1991, 3 November 1992, 25 October 1994,
28 December
1994, 5 January 1995, 22 January 1998 and
20 March 2001.
document reproduced at annexure 'JDP‑6' also contains a notation which
states, of the land being mortgaged, that it was
'formerly' Nelson
Locations 8669, 8670, 8671 and 8678 (the land described in certificate
of title volume 1704 folio 655). By contrast
the document at annexure
'KESJ‑3' simply refers to those particulars. The notation on the document
at annexure 'JDP‑6'
provides that the land is 'now' Nelson
Location 8669 (the land described in certificate of title volume 1986
folio 76) and Nelson
Location 8678 (the land described in certificate of
title volume 1986 folio 78). There are also notations stating that
the encumbrance
was released or discharged as to other parts of the land as
originally encumbered by Mortgage E313667.
differences simply reflect the respondent's own records of what has occurred in
relation to Mortgage E313667 since it was registered
in 1990. They do not
affect the validity or efficacy of Mortgage E313667 as a duly registered
mortgage encumbering the Property.
is a difference between the particulars of the land as mortgaged by
Mortgage E313667 and the certificates of title to the Property
reproduced in annexures 'JDP‑4' and 'JDP‑5'. Again, the
differences do not matter to the master's ultimate conclusion
- the certificates
of title prove that the Property is encumbered by Mortgage E313667 in
favour of the respondent. But, as the differences
are easily explained, we
should proceed to explain how the differences have come about and why they do
not affect the validity or
efficacy of Mortgage E313667 as a duly
registered mortgage encumbering the Property.
certificates of title to the Property as reproduced in
annexures 'JDP‑4' and 'JDP‑5' both record that the land was
previously part of that land described in certificate of title volume 1704
folio 655. This, it will be recalled, is the certificate
of title as
stated on Mortgage E313667 as registered with the Registrar of Titles under
the TLA as reproduced in annexure 'KESJ‑3'
(see [___] above).
certificates of title to the Property also state
land parcel identifier of 'Nelson Location 8669' had been changed to
'lot 8669 on deposited plan 201627' on 27 August 2003 to
issue of a digital certificate of title (annexure 'JDP‑4').
land parcel identifier of 'Nelson Location 8678' had been changed to
'lot 8678 on deposited plan 201627' on 27 August 2003 to
issue of a digital certificate of title (annexure 'JDP‑5').
'JDP‑5' also contains a superseded version of the certificate of title
volume 1986 folio 78. This depicts the following
land as was
originally comprised in certificate of title volume 1704
Accordingly,
when Mortgage E313667 was registered with the Registrar of Titles under the
TLA on 12 March 1990, the Property was part
of the land comprised in Nelson
Locations 8669, 8670, 8671 and 8678 (the land described in certificate
of title volume 1704 folio
655). Mortgage E313667 encumbered all
of that land including land that later became the Property. Afterwards - by no
24 December 1993 having regard to annexures 'JDP‑4' and
'JDP‑5' - the land the subject of certificate of title volume
folio 655 was subdivided into other certificates of title. These included
the certificates of title to the Property. The land
parcel identifiers
associated with those certificates of title have since been modified. But none
of this affected the validity
or efficacy of Mortgage E313667 as a duly
registered mortgage encumbering the Property.
documentary evidence before the master established conclusively that:
(1) the Property is encumbered by Mortgage E313667 of which
respondent is the registered proprietor; (2) Mortgage E313667 was
registered under the TLA against the Property on 12 March 1990;
(3) Mortgage E313667 is in the form of the documents adduced in
evidence by the appellants and the respondent at annexure 'KESJ‑3'
annexure 'JDP‑6' respectively.
the circumstances grounds 3 and 4 do not have a reasonable prospect of
succeeding.
Grounds 5 and 6 - the challenge to the findings as to
whether the Mortgage secures the Facilities
challenges the following finding:
Despite the [appellants'] submissions to the contrary, I am satisfied that the
Mortgage secures the Facilities. The [appellants']
argument to the effect that
neither the Business Loan nor the Overdraft specify any additional security in
the 'Facility Specific
Security' section that relates to each facility, is
without merit. The Mortgage is clearly the 'Security' described in the 'Other
Details', as set out above [45].
ground does not engage with the reasons given by the master for the conclusion
that the Mortgage secures the Facilities. See
the primary reasons at
[44] ‑ [45]. Those reasons are plainly correct. However, as
they are not challenged, there is no need
to rehearse them. Instead, in
alleging error in the conclusion that the Mortgage secures the Facilities, the
appellants again take
issue with whether there is the requisite proof of a
registered mortgage. The appellants say that there is no evidence - and the
respondent has not tendered evidence - of a registered mortgage that is in an
approved form compliant with the TLA describing the
Property and the secured
relates to the appellants' contention before the master that the Letter of Offer
stated that no security was applicable
to the Facilities. It challenges the
following finding in answer to that contention:
As to the first of the allegations relating to the Letter of Offer, as stated
earlier in these reasons, the [appellants'] argument
to the effect that the
Letter of Offer does not specify any additional security under 'Facility
Specific Security' for each facility,
is without merit. The Mortgage is clearly
the 'Security' described in the 'Other Details' section of the Letter of Offer
as with ground 5, in advancing ground 6 the appellants do not engage
with the master's obviously correct reading of the Letter
Ground 6 is instead based on the appellants' contention that there is no
evidence of a registered mortgage that is compliant
with the TLA.
and 6 fail for the same reasons as grounds 3 and 4 fail. To the
extent that, by ground 5, the appellants take issue with
Mortgage E313667 is in an approved form, the instrument itself records that
the form of the mortgage was approved. For the
reasons we have given in dealing
with grounds 3 and 4, the Property is specified in
Mortgage E313667. Finally, insofar as Mortgage
E313667 recorded that
the land the subject of the mortgage was mortgaged 'with the payment,
satisfaction and discharge of the moneys
hereby secured', there was no need to
specify a monetary amount on the face of the instrument.
ground 5 nor ground 6 has a reasonable prospect of
succeeding.
Conclusion and orders
these reasons, being satisfied that none of the grounds of appeal has a
reasonable prospect of succeeding, we made orders
appeal is dismissed.
respondent is discharged from its undertaking as proffered by the respondent's
solicitors' letter dated 14 March 2025 as accepted
in par 1 of the
orders of the court made 21 March 2025.
Paragraphs 2
and 4 of the orders of the court made 21 March 2025 are discharged.
appellants' application in an appeal dated 20 February 2025 is
appellants pay the respondent's costs of the appeal and the application in an
appeal dated 20 February 2025, to be assessed if
not agreed.
Paragraphs 2 ‑ 4
of the orders concerned an application by the appellants to suspend enforcement
of the order for delivery
up of vacant possession of the Property pending the
hearing and determination of the appeal. The appellants' application was
in circumstances where the respondent bank proffered an undertaking
pending the determination of the appeal. The appeal having been
determined it
was appropriate to discharge the respondent from its undertaking. So too the
appellants' application had to be dismissed
and it was necessary to make a
consequential order revoking earlier orders made on 21 March 2025
implementing the regime effected
by the prior acceptance of the respondent's
undertaking.
costs order followed the event.
Annexure: Grounds of Appeal
certify that the preceding paragraph(s) comprise the reasons for decision of the
Supreme Court of Western Australia.
Associate to the Hon Justice
These reasons adopt the defined terms and abbreviations in the primary
National Australia Bank
Limited v Jackson
[2025] WASC 8.
In de Braekt v Legal
Profession Complaints Committee
[2016] WASCA 220
Samuels v The State of
Western Australia
[2005] WASCA 193
(2005) 30 WAR 473
Farrant v Westpac Banking
Corporation
[2024] WASCA 157
RTF format (71.6 MB)
Signed PDF/A format