URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WASTR/2004/49.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:08:39
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
The Owners of Pakenham Apartments - Strata Plan 37612 and Melling & Ors [2004] WASTR 49 (10 September 2004)
OFFICE OF THE STRATA TITLES REFEREE
Strata Titles Act 1985
THE OWNERS OF PAKENHAM APARTMENTS - STRATA PLAN 37612 and
MELLING & ORS
[2004] WASTR 49
MR R J KRONBERGER (REFEREE)
DELIVERED :
10 SEPTEMBER 2004
FILE NO/S :
ST 25 of 2004
THE OWNERS OF PAKENHAM APARTMENTS - STRATA PLAN 37612
RAYMOND KEITH MELLING
JEANETTE CHRISTINE MELLING
GREGORY CHARLES HALL
CORINNE JOY HALL
Respondents
Catchwords:
Real property - Strata titles - common property -
installation of air conditoner - approvals requires
Legislation:
Representation:
Applicant : In person
Respondents : In person
Solicitors:
Applicant : In person
Respondents : In person
Case(s) referred to in decision(s):
Case(s) also cited:
OFFICE OF THE STRATA TITLES
Strata Titles Act 1985
THE OWNERS OF PAKENHAM APARTMENTS - STRATA PLAN 37612 and
MELLING & ORS
MR R J KRONBERGER (REFEREE)
DELIVERED :
10 SEPTEMBER 2004
FILE NO/S :
ST 25 of 2004
STRATA PLAN NO
THE OWNERS OF PAKENHAM APARTMENTS - STRATA PLAN 37612
RAYMOND KEITH MELLING
JEANETTE CHRISTINE MELLING
GREGORY CHARLES HALL
CORINNE JOY HALL
Respondents
Catchwords:
Real property - Strata titles - common property -
installation of air conditoner - approvals requires
Legislation:
Representation:
Applicant : In person
Respondents : In person
Solicitors:
Applicant : In person
Respondents : In person
Case(s) referred to in decision(s):
Case(s) also cited:
REASONS FOR DECISION – PRINCIPAL
1 Installation of an air conditioner in, and alterations to, common
2 The Applicant is "The Owners of Pakenham Apartments – Strata Plan
37612" ("the Strata Company").
Strata Plan and
relevant Act
3 Strata Plan 37612 ("the Strata Plan") was registered on 4 May 2000 pursuant
Strata Titles Act 1985
") which continues to be the
relevant Act.
4 In these Reasons, unless otherwise specified, all references to sections and
Schedules are, respectively, references to sections
of and Schedules to the
5 The parcel is a commercial property known as "Pakenham Apartments" and is
situated at the corner of Pakenham Street and Nairn
Street, Fremantle. The
address of the parcel, as recorded on the Strata Plan is "N
Pakenham Street (cnr of Nairn Street) Fremantle WA 6160".
6 There is a ground floor, a mezzanine floor and a first floor.
7 The parcel originally comprised seven lots but, on 24 October 2000, a plan of
re-subdivision was registered, recording the cancellation
of Lot 7 and the
creation of Lots 8 to 16 inclusive.
8 A further plan of re-subdivision was registered on 28 August 2001, recording
the cancellation of Lots 1 to 6 inclusive and 8 to
16 inclusive and the creation
of Lots 17 to 31 inclusive.
9 The Strata Company's by-laws, as set out in the Management Statement to be
referred to below, refer to a proposal for a further
re-subdivision but it does
not yet appear to have been proceeded with.
Orders sought
10 The Applicant has sought an Order under
in the following
"The Strata Company requests the removal of the air conditioner in Lot 20 (Unit
4) of the complex, installed without prior approval
and full reinstatement of
the common property including security grills (sic) within 14
Lot boundaries
11 There are different endorsements in relation to lots on each floor of the
12 Lot 20, which is owned by the Respondents, Raymond Keith Melling, Jeanette
Christine Melling, Gregory Charles Hall and Corinne
Joy Hall, and is known as
"Unit 4", is a cubic space, the boundaries of which are described by
endorsements on the ground floor page
of the Strata Plan. Those endorsements
13 (a) Vertical levels
"On the ground floor, the stratum of the lots or part of the lots which are
buildings shown on the Strata Plan extends from the upper
surface of the ground
floor to the level of the underside of the ceiling as provided by
Strata Titles Act 1985
14 (b) Horizontal Boundaries
"The boundary of the lots or part lots which are shown on the Strata Plan is the
centreline of dividing walls and on all external
walls of the building the
boundary extends 0.1m into the wall from the inside face, or where otherwise
15 There is a diagram illustrating the application of paragraph (b).
16 There are other endorsements that relate only to "part lots" or "courtyards"
but they are not relevant to Lot
17 When the Strata Plan was registered, its by-laws were contained in
Management Statement H435767 registered contemporaneously
with the Strata
18 Schedule 1 of the Management Statement
20. Installation of air-conditioning
Excluding any air conditioning plant that may have been installed within any
strata lot at the time of the construction of the building
any other air
conditioning units installed in the individual strata lots will be a maximum of
3 horse power capacity, be of the 'split
system' type, have a copper outlet pipe
properly affixed to drain water to the ground, have the outside unit casing of a
be in keeping with colours of the building and be positioned in such a
manner so as not to disturb or annoy other proprietors or
occupiers of other
lots, as will be approved from time to time by the Strata Company, such approval
to be given in writing by the
Council of Strata Company prior to any
installation taking place.
21. Air conditioning
operating costs.
The costs of maintenance, operation, insurance repair and replacement of the
individual air conditioning plants contained within
the building shall be the
responsibility of the registered proprietor of the strata lot to which the air
conditioning plant relates
and any costs of any damage repairs or replacements
to any part of the common property that may become necessary, due to the repair,
maintenance or replacement of any air conditioning plant for which a registered
proprietor is responsible shall be the responsibility
of that registered
proprietor.
23. Exclusive use rights over common property
relative to air conditioning and any machinery installation.
In accordance with
section 42(8)
of the Act the rights of exclusive use and
enjoyment are granted, over that volume of common property occupied by any air
conditioning
plant and any machinery, to an individual strata lot within the
strata scheme, to the registered proprietor of the strata lot to
which the air
conditioning plant or machinery relates;
and further –
any costs of any damage repairs or replacements to any part of the common
property that may become necessary, due to the repair,
maintenance or
replacement of any air conditioning plant or machinery for which a registered
proprietor is responsible shall be the
responsibility of that registered
proprietor.
24. Access to common property for
maintenance of air conditioning and any machinery installation.
A lot proprietor shall have access to the areas of common property external to
the strata lots contained within the strata scheme,
at all times, subject to the
by-laws for the maintenance, repair or replacement of any machinery or building
repair that may be required
in respect to any air conditioning plant or
machinery installation that is the responsibility of a registered proprietor,
that the registered proprietor has first given reasonable notice to
that effect, verbally or in writing, to the Council of the Strata
Company that
such access is required.
2. Behaviour of proprietors,
occupiers and tenants within the scheme.
A proprietor, occupier or tenant of a lot shall not –
(p) install any machinery or air conditioning plant
within any lot so that part of that machinery or plant projects into common
Applicant's submissions
19 The Strata Company's Annual General Meeting was held on 5 February 2003
("the 2003 AGM"). It was chaired by a Mrs Joan Bellerby,
as a representative of
the Strata Company's Managing Agents, Bellcourt Strata Management Pty Ltd
("Bellcourt"). The Minutes of the
Air conditioner U4
Bellcourt were instructed to write to the proprietors again, requesting they
remove the air conditioner and sign, which were attached
to the common property,
without strata company approval.
Should they object, they will need to make an application in writing within 1
month, to the strata company, attaching an approval
letter from the Heritage
Council stating they have no objections to either the sign or air
conditioner."
20 By letter dated 7 February 2003, Mrs Bellerby wrote to the Respondents
advising of the decision of the 2003 AGM requiring removal
conditioner and sign in question within 30 days.
21 At the Strata Company's Annual General Meeting on 4 February 2004 ("the 2004
AGM"), the issues were raised again.
22 The Minutes of the 2004 AGM include
"There was general discussion regarding the air conditioner installation carried
out to Unit 4. The air conditioner has been fitted
into the window section of
the Unit. Several letters to the owner of Unit 4 requesting the removal of the
air conditioner were tabled.
23 It was resolved that another letter be sent to the Respondents requesting
the removal of the air conditioner and reinstatement
of the common property
within 14 days. If this work was not carried out within 14 days, Bellcourt was
instructed to proceed with
an application to me requesting the removal of the
air conditioner and reinstatement of the common property.
24 On 5 February 2004, a letter was sent to the Respondents confirming those
25 On 13 February 2004, one of the Respondents replied in the following terms:
"At the time when we purchased the property from the plans, the units were sold
as commercial property. There were no provisions
made for any type of air
conditioning system to be installed. When the first floor apartments were
developed, they were provided
with an air conditioning system. We could not make
use of this system as we would have to run a duct through the apartment upstairs
which would cause interference. We also could not run a duct down the side of
the building, as this would appear to be extremely
I have to provide a duty of care to my employees as I am sure you can
understand. I have installed the air conditioner to provide
a comfortable
working environment for my staff. When this matter was previously addressed, we
the unit. Therefore as a result, I am
not going to remove the air conditioner for these
Responses to
application
26 The Respondents have provided the only response to this application. They
have repeated the terms of the 13 February 2004 letter
"When this matter was previously addressed, we contacted the Fremantle Council
as well as the Heritage Council, who both approved
27 They have provided me with photographs which they state display other
heritage-listed properties around the Fremantle area which
have similar air
conditioning units installed.
Considerations
28 The Management Statement by-laws that I have quoted earlier in these Reasons
require clarification.
29 For example, Sch 1, by-law 20 appears to acknowledge the existence of air
conditioners at the time the Strata Plan was registered,
although it does not
indicate whether they were totally within lots or partly within lots and partly
within common property. It refers
to air conditioning
"within any strata lot at the time of the construction of the
but, apart from the building's apparent age as suggested by its heritage
listing, it appears to me that there were no strata lots
at that time because
strata titling would not have taken place until after construction of the
30 The same by-law clearly contemplated that lot proprietors would be entitled
to install air conditioners, although it is not clear
whether the Strata
Company's approval related to all aspects of such air conditioners or only to
their positioning.
31 Schedule 1, by-law 21 refers to damage or repairs to or replacements of
common property necessary for the maintenance, repair
or replacement
"individual air conditioning plants contained within the
32 Schedule 1, by-law 23 then purports to grant exclusive use rights, to the
registered proprietor of the strata lot to which the
air conditioning plant or
machinery relates,
"over that volume of common property occupied by any air conditioning plant ...
to an individual strata lot ... to the registered
proprietor of the strata lot
to which the air conditioning plant ...
33 The balance of by-law 23 and all of by-law 24 deal with access to common
property for maintenance, repair or replacement of such
installations.
34 However, Sch 2, by-law 2(p) provides that a proprietor, occupier or tenant
of a lot shall not
"install any machinery or air conditioning plant within any lot so that part of
that machinery or plant projects into common
35 That provision is not qualified in any way. It is not expressed to be
subject to the approval of the Strata Company. It is an
absolute prohibition
which appears to be inconsistent with the Sch 1 by-laws quoted above.
36 In contrast, Sch 2, by-law 3 is expressed to be subject to the approval of
the Strata Company.
37 While the Sch 1 by-laws do permit some air conditioning plant in
some lots and in some parts of the common property,
as well as allowing the
proprietors of those lots to have access to common property, after
“reasonable notice”,
“for the replacement of any machinery required in respect to any air
conditioning plant or machinery
installation...”,
38 that proprietor may be in conflict with Sch 2, by-law 2(p) in the case of
the installation of “any machinery or air conditioning
39 It is unfortunate that the Respondents did not seek the Strata Company's
approval under Sch 1, by-law 20, before proceeding with
the installation of
their air conditioning equipment in part of the common property.
40 However, even if they had done so, any approval granted under Sch 1, by-law
20 would have been in doubt if any part of the
installation
"projects into common property",
because of the prohibition contained in Sch 2, by-law 2(p).
41 The Applicant may need to consider some changes to its by-laws, particularly
if some, but not all, lot proprietors are entitled
to make use of parts of the
common property for the purposes of air conditioning their
42 Taking into account my power under
to express an order in
terms other than sought, my Order is that
“The proprietors of lot 4 on Strata Plan 37612 (“the Strata
Plan”) must, at their cost and risk, by 15 October
2004, (or such later
date as the Strata Company may specify in writing prior to 15 October 2004)
after giving to the Secretary of
“The Owners of Pakenham Apartments
– Strata Plan 37612” not less than 48 hours’ prior written
notice of their
intention in that regard, remove as much of the air conditioning
plant and equipment installed by them or on their behalf in any
part or parts of
the common property comprised in the Strata Plan, making good, at their cost,
any damage caused to the common property
by such installation or
DATED 10 September 2004
_________________________________
RJ KRONBERGER
43 STRATA TITLES REFEREE
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (91.8 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter