URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WATPAT/2004/220.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:10:15
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Lawson and Anor v Shire of Mundaring [2004] WATPAT 220 (13 December 2004)
IN THE TOWN PLANNING
APPEAL TRIBUNAL OF
WESTERN AUSTRALIA
Appeal No. 227 of 2004
[2004] WATPAT 220
Determined on the documents
Decision: 13 December 2004
B E T W E E N:
LEIGH LAWSON AND KIM LAWSON
SHIRE OF MUNDARING
Mr J G Jordan
(Senior Member)
Conditions of approval – Commercial vehicle parking –
Oversize truck - Residential zone – Screening of vehicle –
vehicle movement
Cases referred to
The Tribunal:
This is an appeal by Leigh
and Kim Lawson (“
”) against two of the conditions
imposed by the Shire of Mundaring (“
conditional retrospective approval granted for the parking of a commercial
vehicle at Lot 35 (No. 625) Cook Street,
Mount Helena (“
The subject land has an
area of 2046m
and a 32.13 metre frontage to Cook Street. The
single-storey house on the subject land is set back 17 metres from the
At the east side of the house in the 6.34 metre side setback is
a driveway which extends from double gates at the front
the rear yard.
At this side of the house is also a brick paved path from the front to the side
verandah and back door.
Approved by the
Respondent is the parking of a commercial vehicle. The vehicle is a prime mover
with low loader trailer 2.5 metres
wide and, overall, 16 metres long. The prime
mover is 3.2 metres high. The approved location for the parking is the driveway
the house and the eastern boundary just behind the front building line
of the house.
The two conditions appealed
against as set out in the Respondent Council’s resolution of 27 July 2004
“2. No commercial vehicles or their attachments including trailers shall
be parked on the property unless parked behind the
building line of the property
and screened by a gate or other structure, to the satisfaction of the Executive
Manager Statutory Services.
5. The vehicle is not to be brought to or from the land between the hours of
midnight and
The subject land is zoned
Residential R5 in Shire of Mundaring Town Planning Scheme No.3
Clause 4.46
of TPS3 “Parking of Commercial Vehicles”
“(1) No person shall, on privately owned land within a Residential
(a) park or allow to remain
stationery for more than two hours consecutively –
(i) more than one commercial vehicle unless it is housed in a domestic garage
or domestic outbuilding;
(ii) any vehicle which, due to its size or load, is not capable of being
completely housed within a domestic garage or domestic outbuilding
maximum floor area of 46 m
and in which no horizontal dimension
is more than 7.5 metres; and
(iii) a vehicle which, together with the load thereon, exceeds 2.7m in
unless: ...
(B) The vehicle is not brought to or taken from the land between the hours of
midnight and 6.00 am”.
The Respondent has adopted a
Commercial Vehicle Parking Policy (“
”). The assessment
criteria for the Residential zone at clause 4.1
“(a) The vehicle together with the load thereon, should not exceed 2.7
Policy also includes a list of conditions that may be applied to an approval and
this includes:
“(a) that on-site provision for housing the vehicle in a garage,
outbuilding or parking behind the front building setback line
and the vehicle is
screened from the street and surrounding properties in a manner satisfactory to
the Council; and
(e) the vehicle is not to be brought to or taken from the land between the hours
of midnight and 6 am (refer Town Planning Scheme
4.46(1)(a)).”
the discretion provided in clause 3.2(4)(b) the Respondent resolved
“the proposed use is consistent with the
objectives of the relevant zone”.
It then exercised the
discretion available to it under clause 8.15(1) of TPS3 to relax certain of
the standards and approved
the parking
of the truck subject to conditions
including the two now appealed
Appellants’ position:
11. The Appellants said the gates are unnecessary. The vehicle will be about
30 metres from the actual roadway. It will be
from people
travelling east by the existing house and from people travelling west by the
neighbour’s house and fence.
users would only be able to see the
vehicle if they turned to look directly down the side of the house as they drove
past. Photographs
were provided of examples of vehicles being parked within full
view in the neighbourhood.
12. The Appellants said their children play and ride bikes the full
50 metre length of the driveway using the 3 metres
the parked truck. Further, the two family pet Rottweiler dogs guard the premises
and gates across the driveway would
quick access from the back door to
control these dogs when visitors entered the property.
13. In support of having Condition 5 relaxed it was the Appellants’
submission that in respect of disturbance by trucks “you
cannot cause
something that is already present”. They pointed out that the subject
land is three lots from the heavily used
junction of Cook Street and Bunning
Road. Counts over a one-week period taken for them by a specialist firm were
submitted. These
showed heavy vehicles use Cook Street 24 hours a day. Between
midnight and 6.00am over six nights (the equipment had been vandalised
night) 19 heavy vehicle movements were counted. A Sunday night had zero
14. The Appellants said vehicles stopping, starting and changing gear at the
nearby corner was noisier than their vehicle entering
and leaving the subject
land. Trucks and emergency vehicles also made 24 hour use of the hydrant and the
electricity supply switch
both situated at the front of the subject land.
15. Seven immediate neighbours support the proposal and have not complained in
the three year period prior to the application being
lodged. One neighbour in
the vicinity objected, but the Appellants asserted that some domestic activities
carried out by that neighbour
prior to 6:00am disturb the locality.
16. The Appellants submitted that a significant reason why the hours should be
relaxed is because they provide a 24 hour call
service for emergency
services in the event of a bush fire. The low loader is used to transport
loaders and dozers to the area
threat. If the truck cannot be used during
these hours then it would be necessary to “stand down” from that
17. The Appellants said relaxation of the hours was essential. Curfews imposed
on all oversized vehicles prevent movement in the
metropolitan area between the
hours of 7:30 am to 9:00 am and 4:30 pm to 6:00 pm. It is
necessary therefore
to pick up loads and
to leave the city prior to this time so
that the morning curfew can be avoided. As to returning from long distance
after midnight
the vehicle can be parked for 2 hours in front of the dwelling
before moving off and then returning at 6:00 am.
This arrangement
create more disturbance than if the truck could simply be parked.
18. The Appellants do not understood why they are being treated differently from
other truck drivers, particularly when their livelihood
depends upon full use of
this truck.
Respondent’s Position
19. The Respondent noted that the proposal did not comply with the requirement
that a commercial vehicle be housed in an outbuilding.
It considered, however,
that such an outbuilding would have a greater impact on the amenity of the area
than the truck itself.
In its view, this issue is better addressed by parking
the vehicle behind the building partially screened by a gate.
20. Photographs were provided by the Respondent to demonstrate its submission
that the vehicle would be readily visible from Dargan
Street diagonally opposite
the subject land and by persons travelling west along Cook Street. The
Respondent remained of the opinion
that it is appropriate to partially screen
the commercial vehicle by the use of a gate because this will ensure that the
vehicle is not the dominant element of the streetscape.
21. The Respondent did not support the use of the screen on wheels suggested by
the Appellants. A 1.8 metre high gate would
the condition. A
photograph with such a gate superimposed was submitted to show that a gap could
be left for pedestrians
still screening the vehicle.
22. The Respondent considered that variation to the imposed constraints on the
hours of operation would be detrimental to the Residential
restrictions were imposed in order to ensure that commercial vehicle movements
(and therefore associated noise and light
intrusion) did not occur during the
hours most people sleep.
23. It submitted that this standard condition was consistently applied when
approving commercial vehicle parking and in its view
this lessened the
likelihood of adverse impacts from the use and potential conflicts between the
Appellants and existing and future
occupants of dwellings within the Residential
zone. The Respondent said its concern is to serve the best interests of the
24. The Respondent acknowledged the Appellants’ involvement with emergency
services, but said that this possible exception
to operating hours was not a
reason for allowing all movement at any hour.
25. The two conditions appealed against are standard requirements of the
Respondent. The restriction on hours of operation is a
provision of both TPS3
and the Policy. The Policy also includes the need to consider screening.
26. The Respondent has agreed to relax the provisions requiring complete
concealment of the over height and over length vehicle and
has allowed it to be
parked on the driveway beside the house in a Residential zone. It still
requires, however, partial screening
and restrictions on hours of movement.
27. The Appellants want these two requirements removed, pointing mainly to how
they believe these standards have been applied in
the locality and their
personal situation. I do not consider that because these standards may have been
erratically imposed in this
locality in the past, they should be set aside as a
matter of course in this instance. It is a matter of examining whether the
circumstances also point to the relaxation of these standards.
Condition 2
28. From photographs supplied by both parties, it can be seen that if the truck
were parked as approved and gates were installed
as required by the Respondent
the truck would be visible from about half way up the windscreen above the gates
and the fence of the
neighbour to the east.
29. The Respondent has shown that, if the truck is at the building line a gate
can be so constructed as to partly obscure the vehicle
but still provide a space
for children and animals to move freely down the side of the house between the
verandah and the front yard.
30. Although not on the sketch on which the Respondent based its decision, the
Appellants put it to the Respondent’s staff
and again raised in the appeal
their willingness to park the truck some 30 metres from the road. If the truck
were parked not less
than 12 metres from the front of the house, the truck would
still be partly visible above the fence when approaching from the east,
would be fully visible from in front of the subject land and possibly from
Dargan Street diagonally opposite.
31. The Appellants provided photographs of eight commercial vehicles parked
without screening they say are on lots in the locality.
While any conditions of
approval for the parking of these vehicles are not known, the Respondent simply
dismissed the evidence as
irrelevant rather than showing that such parking
should not be occurring. It must be said that such parking does make a
contribution
to the local character and amenity.
32. Also absent from the papers submitted was any evidence that gates are
normally required in this locality as a condition of commercial
vehicle parking.
33. It is agreed with the Respondent that parked commercial vehicles should not
dominate the streetscape, but if the truck in question
is parked well back as
the Appellants say it can be I do not consider that this will be the result. I
am therefore inclined to allow
the truck to be parked without a gate but well
back from the front building line.
Condition 5
34. As pointed out by the Appellants, there is no control over heavy vehicles
using the roads in the hours between midnight and 6:00
The source of
or the reason for the truck movements that have been recorded between these
hours is not known. The comment can
made, however, that this is intermittent
disturbance not a continual background noise. It is a matter of whether
additional events
with potential to disturb should be allowed.
35. Parking the truck requires it to be stopped in the road then reversed down
the drive. This and the starting, preparing and movement
of the vehicle during
the period after midnight and before 6:00 am would add noise and disturbance to
what might otherwise be quiet
time. This is a residential area and it is not
considered appropriate to add further to any deterioration in the nighttime
That a particular neighbour might have peculiar domestic habits that
disturb in the early morning is not of itself a reason for simply
controls on truck movements.
36. The Appellants outline typical schedules for the use of the truck. It would
appear that truck movements to and from the subject
land between midnight and
6.00am would not be unusual. This is because of the need to be loaded and gone
from the metropolitan area
before heavy truck movements are stopped during
morning peak hour and the late arrivals back in the City from remote locations.
the information provided it would seem that early morning starts and late
returns for heavy haulage vehicles are normal rather than
an exception.
37. It might well be that, on rare occasions, there is a specific emergency that
compels use of the truck in question after hours,
but this is not considered to
provide a basis for no control at all on truck movements.
38. The contribution the Appellants make to emergency services by providing a
vehicle that can transport heavy machinery to sites
to assist in fire fighting
is recognised. I would agree with the Respondent, however, that this admirable
contribution is an exception,
and should not provide a reason for the complete
relaxation of movement times. To have no restriction on commercial vehicle
is considered to be undesirable in what is a residential area.
39. Notwithstanding that trucks use Cook Street as a route after midnight, I do
not accept that having no control at all over when
trucks can be moved to and
from residential lots is consistent with maintaining residential amenity.
40. From the evidence presented, I find that there is an established character
in this residential area that includes unscreened
parked commercial vehicles.
If sufficiently parked back from the building line, I consider that the parking
of the Appellants’
truck would not dominate the streetscape and be
consistent with that character.
41. In respect of hours of operation, I have formed the view that, in the
interests of maintaining the long-term residential character
of the locality it
would not be appropriate to further erode the minimum standards the Respondent
has established on when commercial
vehicles can be moved to and from a
residential lot.
42. I therefore advise that the appeal is determined as
(a) The appeal against Condition 2 is upheld to the extent that Condition 2 as
imposed is deleted and replaced with the following
“2 The commercial vehicle is to be parked not less than 12 metres back
from the front building line of the
(b) The appeal against Condition 5 is dismissed.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (61.5 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter