URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WATPAT/2004/216.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:09:52
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Halvorsen v City of Joondalup and Ors [2004] WATPAT 216 (2 December 2004)
IN THE TOWN PLANNING
APPEAL TRIBUNAL OF
WESTERN AUSTRALIA
Appeal No. 54 of 2004
[2004] WATPAT 216
Heard: 22 November 2004
Decision: 2 December 2004
B E T W E E N:
STEIN HALVORSEN
CITY OF JOONDALUP
First Respondent
MARINO BAUMGARTNER AND KERRY BAUMGARTNER
Second Respondents
Mr P McGowan
(President)
Section 18(2)
Town Planning and Development Act 1928
representation
– Minutes on the nature of the inquiry – No power to investigate,
report or advise in relation to matters
which arise since representation first
made to Minister
Cases referred to
Lakes Action Group Association Inc v Shire of Northam and BGC Australia
[2004] WATPAT 195
Evans v Shire of Murray
[2004] WATPAT
Appearances
The Appellant appeared in person
Mr C Slarke (instructed by McLeods) appeared for the First Respondent
The Second Respondents appeared in person
The Tribunal:
1. This appeal had its introduction as a representation made to the Minister for
Planning and Infrastructure by the Appellant.
2. In accordance with the provisions of
section 18(2)(a)
Town Planning
and Development Act 1928
”) the Minister referred
the representations to the Tribunal for its report and recommendations.
3. The referral is in the following terms:
“Attached please
find correspondence date 1 April, 14 April, 20 June and 16 November 2003
from Mr Stein Halvorsen, concerning
the above development.
I am referring this representation to the Tribunal for a report and
recommendation pursuant to
section 18(2)(a)
Town Planning and
Development Act
, and request that an appropriate investigation be undertaken
into the matter. I have advised Mr Halvorsen of the action being
include herewith relevant background correspondence from this office to the
complainant.”
4. Mr Halvorsen resides at 160A Waterford Drive, Hillarys. His representations
relate to additions and alterations to the house on
the adjoining lot 160B
Waterford Drive Hillarys owned by the second Respondents.
5. In accordance with the provisions of
section 18(2)(b)
the representations
once referred to the Tribunal were conducted in the form of an appeal.
6. Thus a directions hearing was arranged soon after the institution of the
appeal at which time it was apparent that notification
needed to be given to the
now Second Respondents.
7. Having been so notified an order was made joining them as parties to the
appeal in order to ensure that the investigation and
the report was
8. Before returning specifically to the representations made to the Minister it
is appropriate to complete a narrative of that which
has occurred since matters
were first raised with her.
9. On 26 November 2002 the Second Respondents lodged with the First Respondent
an application for approval in relation to additions
and alterations proposed to
be carried out on their property.
10. This application was referred to adjoining neighbours including the
Appellant in February 2003. The Appellant lodged a formal
objection dated 3
March 2003 raising a number of matters.
11. Ultimately on 14 March 2003 the application was approved under delegated
authority by Mr Graham Catchpole who was at that time
the Acting Manager,
Approvals, Planning and Environment Services in consultation with the Mayor of
the First Respondent.
12. After the institution of the present appeal (ie upon referral of the
Appellant’s representations to the Tribunal) there
appeared to be reason
for the First Respondent to investigate whether the work which had been carried
out apparently in consequence
of the approval of 14 March 2003 was in accordance
with that approval.
13. On further investigation it appeared that there were in certain respects a
departure from the approval granted on 14 March 2003.
14. In the meanwhile this matter had been programmed to a hearing in order to
establish the evidence preparatory to providing a report
to the Minister as
contemplated by
section 18(2a).
15. The matter was due to be heard on 17 May 2004.
16. However before the matter was heard it became apparent that the Second
Respondents intended to apply for retrospective approval
in relation to
variations or departures from the approval granted on 14 March 2003.
17. The hearing was vacated in order to enable that process to proceed.
18. It should be emphasised at the outset that that of course is not the issue
with which this Tribunal is concerned, but rather
it was a means by which the
Tribunal would be aided in identification of certain factual matters necessary
in relation to the report
and recommendation to be provided to the Minister.
19. The upshot is that the application for retrospective approval was dealt with
the by the Commissioners of the First Respondent
at their meeting on 23 November
2004, that is the day after the hearing of this matter. The Commissioners
resolved to grant retrospective
20. Ultimately the issue with which this report and recommendation is concerned
is to determine whether the representations made
by Mr Halvorsen
demonstrate that the First Respondent has failed to “enforce effectively
the observance of a Town Planning
Scheme in force under this Act or any
provisions of the Scheme.”
What are the representations
made to the Minister?
21. The representations made by the Appellant in so far as they can be gleaned
from the four letters referred to by the Minister
might be categorised in the
following way:
(a) Whether the original approval granted by the First Respondent on 14 March
2003 was valid;
(b) Building issues, that is whether the work which has been carried out is in
some way different from or departs from either the
approval granted by the First
Respondent or the Residential Design Codes.
22. Set out below are extracts from the Appellant’s letter to the Minister
of 16 November 2003 and 14 April 2003.
“1. My interests
have been adversely affected by the alleged conduct of the city of
Joondalupe’s (sic) decision to allow
a two storey extension to be built on
2. The alleged conduct of the city of Joondalupe (sic) has resulted in my
suffering a grievance beyond that experienced by an ordinary
member of the
public by having the overwhelming impact of the two storeys right on top of my
main outdoor area, and only 1.8m, from
the swimming pool edge. The impact of the
neighbours intrusion makes the pool and outdoor areas (including the lower
garden), as
well as the indoors areas (the neighbour can see strait in through
my windows), very unpleasant to be staying in. From their proposed
new balcony
they will have a view into my living rooms and bed rooms.
1. City of Joondalupe (sic) have failed to enforce the provision of their
scheme, the envelope that allow max one storey building
on the border. They have
further failed to enforce the required distance to the border set out in Your
R-Code. All of this clearly
shown on my drawing previously sent to You, as well
as specified in text on previous letters.
2. The R-Code has stipulated setbacks from borders, and the city of
Joondalupe (sic) has limited the height of buildings on borders
in their so
called envelope. These are the provisions that are set out, and are to be
followed. There are no exceptions from these
3. These above and other matters have been further specified in my previous
forwarded drawing and letters to You.
4. The City of Joondalupe has not returned any argument for failing to
execute the provisions of the R-Code and their own envelope.
Many letters, faxes
and phone calls to them has been in vain. Some of them will be forwarded to
Hillarys 16/11/2003
Yours sincerely
S Halvorsen
Owner of house number 160A, (lot # 1 and 3) Waterford Drive,
“Your ref: 02034
RE. Development/Building application for proposed
alterations and addition to existing house number 160B (lot # 2 and 4.)
Waterford Drive, Hillarys.
For easier understanding of my letter to you of the 1/4/03 I have enclosed a
, showing how The Counsel has broken every rule in the book when
granting this development application.
According to the City of Joondalup Policy 3.1.9 Approvals & Planning Fact
Sheet section 4(b), this development require Counsel
determination.
Has this been done, or is the approval formally invalid?
Hillarys 14/04/2003
Yours sincerely
S Halvorsen
Owner of house number 160A, (lot #1 and 3) Waterford Drive,
23. One issue which was raised by Mr Halvorsen was whether the development
application was open to be approved.
24. That is not a matter with which the Tribunal can be concerned under
25. As the Tribunal has previously observed it is not in the nature of such an
inquiry to open up what would be a de facto appeal
by an adjoining property
Evans v Shire of Murray
[2004] WATPAT 197.
26. Equally it is clear that it is the precise representation made to the
Minister and in turn referred to the Tribunal that governs
the extent of any
report and recommendation with which the Tribunal is concerned:
Lakes Action
Group Association Inc v Shire of Northam and BGC Australia Pty Ltd
WATPAT 195.
27. Thus for example an argument as to whether an approval was validly granted
is not of the nature of a matter with which
section 18(2)(a)
is concerned. That
is a matter which, if well founded, would be the subject of an application for
either prerogative relief
declaration to like effect made to the Supreme
Court. In any event I am entirely satisfied that there was proper approval for
development application. Clause 8.6 of the First Respondent’s
District Planning Scheme No. 2 (“
”) permits delegation
of development control powers and powers and duties in relation to other
planning functions.
28. The Appellant relies upon the First Respondent’s policy described as
Development Services and in particular the following
“Applications which exceed the building threshold
envelope should be deemed to be non-complying applications for which
development approval is required. Non-complying applications
shall be processed as follows:
(b) in cases in which notified land owners have raised concerns or objections
OR the application is not supported by the Manager,
Approvals, Planning and
Environmental Services, the application is to be presented to Council for
determination.”
29. The Appellant says that in the circumstances as obtained here where he had
raised an objection then the matter was to be dealt
with by Council for
determination rather, as appears to be the case, determined under delegated
30. Counsel for the First Respondent accepted that there appears to have been
perhaps a departure from such policy in relation to
the way in which this matter
was dealt with.
31. That in no way detracts from the validity of the delegated authority held by
the decision-maker and in no way detracts from the
capacity of such a decision
to be made in accordance with the provisions of clause 8.6 DPS 2. The argument,
in my view, has no foundation.
Building issues
32. A number of issues which have been raised by the Appellant relate to work
which has been carried out which is said in some way
to be different from the
approval or has simply not been approved.
33. In the review of the steps that have been undertaken the short answer in
relation to the inquiry under
section 18(2)(a)
is that there is absolutely no
evidence to suggest a failure on the part of the First Respondent to effectively
enforce the
of its scheme.
34. Even if there was a departure, the response of the First Respondent in
dealing with the builder, identifying the departure, requiring
as completed
plans to be prepared to enable an exact comparison with that which was approved
and the fact that the application is
now the subject of an application for
retrospective approval entirely repudiates the notion that there has been a
failure on the
part of the First Respondent to effectively enforce its scheme.
Rather the behaviour of the Respondent is in accordance with the
provisions of
the scheme.
35. Lest there be any doubt it is clear that the provisions of clause 6.12
permit Council to grant planning approval:
development already commenced or carried out regardless of when it was commenced
or carried out regardless of when it
was commenced or carried out.”
36. The fact that an application is entertained by the First Respondent for
retrospective approval does not identify a basis upon
which one could conclude
that there has been a type of failure with which
section 18(2)(a)
is concerned,
but rather in the circumstances I have described above, demonstrate that there
has been no such failure and therefore
no basis for any representation made to
that effect.
37. Thus for example, an issue agitated by the Appellant which appears to be a
matter of ongoing concern is whether the plans as
approved included approval for
an enclosed rear deck on the Second Respondent’s property. The Appellant
contends that his interpretation
of the drawing and of the approval does not
lead to that result.
38. However the evidence of Mr Lohman who is a Senior Planning Officer of the
First Respondent that at all times that was the basis
upon which approval was
granted and the approved plans demonstrate the recognition and acceptance that
that, in fact, was what was
39. The City of Joondalup, also in the exercise of discretion, permitted certain
departures from development standards either contained
in the Residential Design
Codes or within DPS 2. The capacity to effect such a variation within the
exercise of discretion is undoubted.
See for example clause 4.5 of DPS 2.
40. Again, to open up this matter further would convert such an inquiry into a
de facto appeal by an adjoining neighbour. No such
right exists under the
Town Planning and Development Act 1928
or under DPS 2. It would be to
contort the nature of the inquiry if it were permitted to embark upon a
merits-based assessment of
a discretionary decision made by the First Respondent
in relation to the Second Respondent’s application for development
41. Having heard the evidence and having considered the representations made by
the Appellant I am satisfied that there has been
no failure on the part of the
Respondent to “enforce effectively the observance of a Town Planning
Scheme in force under this
Act or any of the provisions of the Scheme” and
I report to the Minister accordingly.
42. As a result my recommendation is to so advise the parties and conclude the
matter upon that basis.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (65.3 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter