URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WASAT/2025/115.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:07:08
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
JA [2025] WASAT 115 (21 October 2025)
STATE ADMINISTRATIVE
GUARDIANSHIP AND ADMINISTRATION ACT 1990
[2025] WASAT 115
MS F CHILD, MEMBER
26 AUGUST 2025
DELIVERED :
21 OCTOBER 2025
FILE NO/S :
GAA 2144 of 2025
Represented Person
Guardianship and administration - Periodic
review of administration and guardianship orders - Represented person with
intellectual
disability - Need for administrator and guardian - Refusal of
father/carer of the represented person to restore funds withdrawn from
represented person's bank account to the estate - Loss of interest income to the
estate - Father proposing self as administrator
- Father not suitable for
appointment - Former bankrupt - Failure to cooperate with the appointed
administrator to restore funds
to a secure interest earning account - Use of
represented person's funds to contribute to the purchase of a vehicle used
for the father's business - Other potential conflicts of interest -
Need for an independent administrator - Allegation by represented
person that he
had been hit by father - Denial by father of the incident - Need for independent
oversight of accommodation and services
decisions - Public Advocate reappointed
as limited guardian - Public Trustee reappointed as plenary administrator
Legislation:
Guardianship and Administration Act 1990
s 107(1)(d)
s 110ZD(4)(c)
Public Trustee Act 1941
Public Trustee appointed as the administrator of the
Public Advocate appointed as limited guardian
Representation:
Represented Person
Solicitors:
Represented Person
Case(s) referred to in decision(s):
[2019] WASAT 118
[2018] WASAT 68
[2020] WASAT 73
SAL and JGL
[2016] WASAT 63
FOR DECISION OF THE TRIBUNAL
Introduction
are the reasons for the decision made on review of orders pursuant to
Guardianship and Administration Act 1990
which appoint the Public Trustee as plenary administrator of JA's estate and the
Public Advocate as JA's limited guardian.
hearing of the reviews was conducted on 26 August 2025. JA, his mother D,
father B and stepfather T, together with the delegated
guardian of the Public
) all attended the hearing in person. The decisions on
the reviews were reserved and these are the reasons for the decisions
Background and history of orders
is a 34-year-old man who lives with an intellectual disability. Guardianship
and administration orders were first made for JA
in 2018. Prior to that time
his financial and personal decisions were managed informally with support from
his family.
administration order was first made for JA on 26 June 2018 when his sister, S,
was appointed the plenary administrator of his
estate. That order followed an
application by a clinical neuropsychologist (the original applicant)
because of conflict which had
arisen between JA's parents about the management
of his financial affairs. Reasons for that decision were published as
[2018] WASAT 68
administration order was revoked on 3 July 2018 on the urgent application of the
Public Advocate and a new order made appointing
the Public Trustee as the
plenary administrator of JA's estate. The review was sought and the appointment
of the Public Trustee
proposed as $55,000 of JA's savings had been
withdrawn from his bank account on the day the original administration order was
later advised that following the appointment of S as the administrator of JA's
estate that he, B had been 'disappointed' and
driven JA to his bank 'straight from the
B acknowledged that in the hearing JA had supported S's appointment as the
administrator of his
Trustee reported that $57,239.09 was transferred from one of JA's accounts to
another account and then $55,000 was then
withdrawn in cash.
appointment the Public Trustee was directed to take immediate steps to secure
the estate of JA including the recovery of the withdrawn
There was delay in the Public Trustee taking action for reasons explained in
[2020] WASAT 73
Despite later efforts by the Public
have not been restored to his estate as B has not cooperated with the Public
a letter to the Tribunal dated 31 August 2023, the Senior Legal Officer of the
Public Trustee advised that Counsel's opinion had
been sought by the Public
Trustee and the view expressed that as there was no certainty how much of the
funds remained, it was difficult
to ascertain what further steps could
meaningfully be undertaken to recover the funds. Following this the Public
Trustee determined
that no further recovery action could be taken.
application for the appointment of a guardian for JA was made by the original
applicant in August 2018 following a further deterioration
in communication
between family members and withdrawal of JA from his long-term
employment.
Public Advocate was appointed JA's limited guardian with the following
(a) to decide where the represented person is to live,
whether permanently or temporarily;
(b) to decide with whom the represented person is to live;
(c) to decide whether the represented person should work and, if so, the
nature or type of work, for whom he is to work and matters
related thereto;
(d) to determine what contact, if any, the represented person should have
with others and the extent of that contact;
(e) to determine the services to which the represented person should have
access; and
(f) to determine whether the represented person travels outside of Western
Australia or Australia .
guardianship and administration orders were reviewed in July 2020 and the
order appointing the Public Trustee was confirmed.
guardianship order was amended and the Public Advocate now exercises the
(a) to decide where the represented person is to live,
whether permanently or temporarily;
(b) to decide with whom the represented person is to live; and
(c) to determine the services to which the represented person should have
orders made on 3 July 2020 are the orders now under review.
The s 84 Review
guardianship and administration orders made under the GA Act must be
Legislation and principles to be observed
appoint an administrator of his estate either initially or on review of an
order, I must be satisfied that JA is unable by reason
of a mental disability to
make reasonable judgments about all or any part of his estate and that he is in
need of an administrator
appoint a guardian either initially or on review I must be satisfied that JA is:
(a) incapable of looking after his own health and safety;
(b) unable to make reasonable judgments about his person; or
(c) is in need of oversight care or control in the interests of his own
health and safety or for the protection of others and is in
satisfied that JA is a person for whom orders can and should be made, I must
then consider who should be appointed, the scope
of the authority and the
duration of any orders made.
all proceedings under the GA Act the Tribunal must observe the principles as set
out in s 4 of the GA Act.
principles provide that the primary concern of the Tribunal is the best
interests of JA.
principles also provide that JA is presumed to be capable of looking after his
own health and safety; making reasonable judgments
in respect of matters
relating to his person; managing his own affairs; and making reasonable
judgments in respect of matters relating
to his estate, until the contrary is
proved to the satisfaction of the
principles also say that orders should not be made unless they are needed; if
the needs of the person concerned can be met by
less restrictive means, then
orders should not be
If an order
is made it should be in the least restrictive terms
plenary guardian should not be appointed if a limited order will meet the needs
of the represented
considering any matter relating to JA, I should seek to ascertain his wishes as
expressed at the time or gathered from his previous
Evidence and material before the Tribunal on Review
addition to hearing from JA, D, B and an oral report from the guardian at the
review hearing, the following documents have been
filed for the
(a) a report of Dr JR dated 18 May 2025;
(b) a service provider report from the Specialist Support Coordinator dated
12 June 2025;
(c) a Functional Capacity Assessment of JA completed on 16 January 2024
by RL an Occupational Therapist; and
(d) report of trust manager of the Public Trustee dated
14 August 2025.
have also had regard to material filed by the parties in the previous
proceedings to which I have referred including submissions
by B and a report
from the Senior Legal Officer of the Public Trustee dated 31 August 2023
and also to transcripts of previous hearings.
of historical
assessments
in the original proceedings report JA as having an intellectual disability and
this was confirmed by the applicant neuropsychologist.
the original proceeding JA's need for support in financial and personal
decision-making was supported by the applicant, JA's mother
D and his sister S
and the Public Advocate's investigator who had interviewed JA prior to the
hearing. I was satisfied that JA was
reliant on others to manage his finances.
I was also satisfied despite B's challenge to the professional and other
evidence that
JA's reliance on others for financial decision-making was
consistent with B's past conduct in assisting and intervening on JA's behalf
respect of a range of financial matters. B's own submission to the original
hearing was that he supervised JA's financial
management.
B initially argued JA could make his own financial (and other) decisions,
in his submissions filed for the review proceeding
in 2020, B conceded that
'[JA] will always require oversight, it is the nature of his
disability'.
recent medical report of Dr JR dated 7 August 2025 refers to JA having an
unclear diagnosis: 'query birth trauma'. JA's condition
is described by Dr JR
as static one and his opinion is that JA is incapable in all spheres of
financial and personal decision-making.
The report notes that JA usually asks
his father to make decisions on his behalf.
functional capacity assessment dated 16 January 2024 submitted for the review
confirms JA's intellectual disability and reports
on the impacts it has on his
cognitive function and the barriers it creates to his performance of financial
management. The report
notes that JA has difficulty with learning new skills,
with memory, attention, organisation and planning which are noted to be all
essential components of financial management.
report notes that JA has reported difficulty with planning, organisation,
initiation, memory, budgeting and problem-solving associated
with grocery
shopping due to his intellectual disability.
is reported that he is informally supported by his father B to complete grocery
shopping. The cognitive components of planning
meals, writing a list and
ensuring items are' ticked off are managed by [B]'.
Functional Capacity assessment also confirms the impact of JA's intellectual
disability on the management of personal tasks noting
that the intellectual
disability impacts on JA's cognition make sequencing tasks, organisation,
timeliness and learning new skills
difficult. It notes that JA would benefit
from capacity building in a number of personal areas including shaving, cooking,
identifying
the need for cleaning. Specific challenges experienced by JA in the
areas of short-term and working memory, concentration and problem
solving were
identified. The report notes that JA has limited insight into
his difficulties.
report of the support coordinator states that JA lives with his father and
visits his mum, stepdad and sister frequently and
goes on holidays with his mum.
He is reported to have good and close relationships with his family. JA and B
are reported to get
along but B 'can appear to be controlling at times as he is
naturally protective of [JA]'. D is described as 'very supportive and
in all aspects of [JA's] care'. JA is described as having 'some issues' in
the sphere of simple financial decision-making
such as putting his debit card
details online and sharing his banking details with people. He is described as
vulnerable to financial
exploitation.
support coordinator reports JA is currently living with his father and this
arrangement suits them both well. She notes that
JA is on a community housing
list in the event that living with his father is no longer suitable. JA is said
to have been exploring
independent living options but does not feel ready to
live independently from his family at this time.
Presumption of capacity displaced
on the evidence filed for this review to which I have referred and the clear
reliance of JA on others and the history I am
satisfied that the presumption
that JA is capable of making reasonable judgments about his person and his
estate is displaced.
am satisfied and I find that JA has an intellectual disability which is a mental
disability as defined in the GA
64 of the GA Act for the appointment of an administrator of an estate requires
that the person concerned be unable by reason
of their mental disability of
making reasonable judgments about their
[2019] WASAT
... a person's ability to make reasonable judgments about their estate requires
that they have the intellectual ability necessary
to make decisions of that
kind. An individual's ability to make reasonable judgments in respect of their
estate requires that they
have, amongst other things, the ability: to understand
the need for, and sources of, income available to them; to understand the
of any income received relative to items of expenditure; to identify and
calculate necessary expenditure for day to day living,
together with expenditure
for longer term financial objectives and discretionary items; to devise a budget
so as to be able to live
within their means; to identify and to assess the
financial implications of particular items of expenditure or of financial
(for example whether to enter into contracts such as those for the
purchase of a phone, household items, a car, or a house); to organise
affairs so as to be able to meet debts as they fall due; and to identify and
implement problem solving strategies for resolving
any unexpected financial
regard to the medical opinion and other professional evidence of his memory and
problem-solving deficits and the acknowledged
history JA's reliance on others to
support, oversee and manage his financial affairs I am satisfied that he is
unable by reason of
his intellectual disability to make reasonable judgments
regard to the medical and other health professional's reports I am also
satisfied that JA is unable to make reasonable judgments
unable, on his own, to look after his own health and safety and is in need of
oversight and care in the interests
of his own health and safety.
am satisfied that the presumption of capacity is displaced and JA remains a
person for whom both an administration and guardianship
order may be made.
Wishes of JA
previously expressed wishes were that all his family members were involved in
decision-making for
the original hearing JA supported the appointment of his sister S as the
administrator of his estate.
asked in the review hearing how things were going for him JA said, '[r]eally
previously asked whether the trust manager of the Public Trustee would attend
the hearing using her first name. JA said he
did not have questions for her but
just wanted to know if she was coming. I infer from this that JA has a working
relationship with
the trust manager who notes in her report dated 14 August
2025 that JA emails or calls on occasion to discuss the provision of funds.
also appears to have a working and trusting relationship with the delegated
guardian of the Public Advocate and I will return
to this later in these
Administration
report of the Public Trustee's trust manager notes that JA's income is a
disability support pension and a fortnightly wage of
$204 paid from B's
business. Superannuation contributions are made to JA's superannuation account
from the business. The report
notes that Public Trustee tax officers
oversee JA's tax obligations if any. Payments are made on JA's behalf by the
Public Trustee
including a third of the rent in a tenancy he shares with B. The
trust manager notes that as B operates his home business from the
premises, the
business pays one-third and B pays the other third of the rent. JA's third
share applies to the utility costs as well.
JA's expenses include the payment
of his health insurance and gym membership. The trust manager reports that D
was reimbursed on
the provision of receipts for expenditure on JA's behalf for
flights accommodation and expenses for a holiday to Melbourne.
trust manager advises that the Public Trustee became aware of a motor vehicle
registered in JA's name when the licence renewal
was received. The report
states that B advised the Public Trustee that he had been the owner of the
vehicle and had transferred
it to JA to protect the asset 'in the event of [B's]
demise'. B is reported to have said he intended to transfer the vehicle back
himself as he would use the vehicle as a work vehicle. B was asked to provide
details of the prior ownership of the vehicle,
but the trust manager reports
this had not been provided. In the hearing B said he had no recollection of the
trust manager notes in her report that no funds had been advanced from funds
held by the Public Trustee for JA for the purchase
of the vehicle. The Public
Trustee reports that the insurance and registration costs for the vehicle are
being paid from JA's funds
by the Public Trustee.
the hearing B said he and JA had bought the car
He said that each contributed half to the purchase of the vehicle which
cost $4,500. B said JA gave him his share of the money
which he used together
with his share to pay for the
he did not know where JA had obtained the money.
as reported in the Functional Capacity Assessment JA had previously been very
keen to obtain one, he does not have a motor
vehicle driver's licence. D
confirmed in the hearing that JA had decided that he did not really want to get
that JA 'can rely on public transport quite well, Uber, taxis and we don't see
the necessity for him to have a driver's
said he was paying for the vehicle insurance monthly and said he did not know
how the Public Trustee had got
The obligation on an administrator to insure an asset of a represented
person and pay the required vehicle registration was explained
to him. B said
that to his knowledge he had never received any communication about the matter
from the Public Trustee but said if
he saw the email sent he would retract that
comment 'quite
confirmed that the vehicle was used '90 - 95 percent of the time' for B's
business and that he maintained records associated with
its use for tax
the previous decision regarding the funds withdrawn from JA's bank account in
2018 (reported as JA
2020) I was satisfied that B had instigated and
facilitated the withdrawal of JA's funds from JA's bank because of B's
to the appointment of an administrator of JA's estate. I did not and
do not accept that JA was able to or did act independently
of B regarding the
process to transfer and withdraw the funds. I came to this conclusion based on
B's own statements and the assessment
of the original applicant that JA
experienced global cognitive impairment including particular weaknesses in
reasoning and executive
functioning skills.
the hearing in 2020 B confirmed he knew the whereabouts of the withdrawn funds
and said they would not be returned (to JA's estate)
unless the administration
'[t]hey're [the Public Trustee] never going to get the money. I'm never going
to tell them where the money is'.
statement and
confirmed that B and not JA had ultimate control of JA's funds.
the recent review hearing on questioning B denied knowledge of the whereabouts
of the funds but said they were in a 'safe secure
place' and 'must
in cash and
were not in a bank account or other investment.
evidence that he does not know the whereabouts of JA's funds is inconsistent
with his statement that the funds are in a 'safe
and secure place' and his prior
statements made in the previous proceeding. I am satisfied that B knows the
whereabouts of JA's
funds and continues to exercise control over the expenditure
of those funds. JA's financial contribution to the purchase of the
vehicle used
in B's business, is I find more likely than not to have come from those funds
since no funds were advanced from JA's
savings held by the Public Trustee for
this purpose and JA's weekly income is very limited.
2020 B offered to provide D 'full banking transparency of all of [JA's] bank
accounts and
this assurance D advised in the review hearing that she does not know the
whereabouts of JA's funds.
no one other than B and perhaps
know of the
whereabouts of JA's funds is of considerable concern and I raised this with B in
the review hearing. To illustrate the
difficulty, I referred B to his comments
to the Public Trustee that the purported transfer of the vehicle to JA was to
protect JA's
interest in the vehicle on B's demise. B did not accept that the
same applies to JA's withdrawn funds. JA's position in respect
identification and assertion of his ownership of the funds is highly vulnerable
if B dies before JA. JA has always relied
on his parents in respect of dealing
with third parties and with his banking. B acknowledged this when explaining in
hearing that JA's bank account had been hacked into three times but
that JA had been fully compensated by the bank under B's
'direction'.
reliance on his parents in relation to banking and financial arrangements was
also made clear from the circumstances in the
lead up to the original
application being made when each parent made changes to JA's banking
arrangements. If no one other than
B knows that the withdrawn funds, which are
understood to be held in cash somewhere are JA's, then it is possible that they
be lost to his estate permanently.
the original proceeding B said that he experienced significant health problems
and was experiencing carer stress. He said he
had to close his previous
business due to a deterioration in his health with significant impact on him
personally and financially.
Given B's health history and his age it is
possible, even probable that he will die before JA. It is in my view imperative
the funds, or whatever is left of them, are restored in some way to JA to
prevent their permanent loss to his estate and to provide
for his future
the funds are not to be in any form of interest-bearing account, or any other
form of investment represents an ongoing loss
to JA's estate which B himself has
acknowledged.
the review hearing B said he had made enquiries about a deposit of funds into
JA's superannuation fund. He said '[h]opefully,
I could put it into a
superannuation scheme, which would be
fantastic'.
I advised him to seek advice about JA's superannuation arrangements.
JA is in need of an administrator of his estate
noted, I am satisfied that JA is and has always been reliant on others for the
overall management of his financial affairs. This
was acknowledged by B in the
review hearing when referring to the appointment of an administrator made in the
first proceeding.
B said, 'I've been doing that all the
finds the requirement to seek reimbursement from the Public Trustee for
expenditure on JA's travel costs (or as she described to
seek permission for JA
to travel), as unnecessary and would prefer that family made these decisions.
However, the process to obtain
funds was said by D to be 'quite smooth, that
[the trust manager] was very good, she set things up, we just said where we were
However, D said 'it's just easier if we can just make the decisions
ourselves'.
It is acknowledged that this level of scrutiny may be experienced as
intrusive. However, I am satisfied that it is in JA's best
interests that there
be independent oversight of JA's financial affairs to ensure his interests are
protected to the extent possible.
informal arrangements to manage JA's finances prior to the original proceedings
broke down due to conflict between JA's parents.
Although that conflict is reported to have reduced, I am satisfied that there is
a continuing need for independent oversight of JA's
finances. JA is employed in
B's business, shares accommodation and costs with him. I consider that B has at
times demonstrated
an inability to differentiate his own needs and interests
from those of JA's. This can be illustrated when B was experiencing housing
proposed to use JA's savings as a deposit for a property to be held as tenants
in common between B and JA (each having a half
share despite the disparate
contributions with B's contribution to the purchase price being a contribution
to the mortgage payment)
in a location of B's choosing without consultation with
D or apparent consideration of JA's overall housing
recently there was the example of the purchase of a vehicle using funds of
which is used
for the majority of the time in B's business when JA does not have a driver's
licence and, according to B's evidence,
uses public transport. JA is through
the Public Trustee meeting the costs of vehicle licencing and insurance.
B did not appear
to have considered the implications for the use of JA's
funds in this way prior to the review hearing.
am satisfied that the Public Trustee has sought information from B and his
failure to provide information about the vehicle transfer
requested is a
continuation of his lack of cooperation with the Public Trustee and the
Tribunal since the original
proceeding.
am satisfied that there are no less restrictive alternatives to the appointment
of an administrator of JA's estate. I accept the
evidence of the original
applicant that JA lacks capacity to make an enduring power of
B proposes his appointment as administrator at the review, I am not satisfied
that he is suitable for appointment.
JA 2020 at [89] - [107] when B also proposed his appointment, I considered this
in reference to requirements of s 68(3) of the
GA Act in determining the
suitability of a proposed administrator of the estate of a represented person.
I then found that B was
not suitable for appointment. In summary I found that B
had not acted in the best interests of JA in facilitating the removal and
refusal to return the withdrawn funds to a secure and an interest accruing
account which had and continued to diminish JA's estate.
B had not cooperated
with the Public Trustee (or with S the original administrator) and there could
be no confidence that he would
comply with the obligation on an administrator to
account if required by the Public Trustee [at [98] - [99]. B's financial
circumstances
were more limited than JA and B had been bankrupt [at 106].
the review hearing B again proposed his appointment as administrator. I
referred to the need to consider the suitability of any
appointment and referred
to B's refusal to disclose the whereabouts of JA's funds, B's financial position
and his past bankruptcy.
B said he had been
and that he was, '[v]ery proud of them as well'.
regard to the history and the current circumstances of JA, I am not
satisfied that B is suitable for appointment as the administrator
of JA's estate
and will confirm the appointment of the Public Trustee as the plenary
administrator of JA's estate.
Guardianship
guardian reported that JA is supported by his mum, his sister and his father.
JA and B have been living together and have good
support services around them.
JA is reported to be very close to his family and often spends time with them.
JA also works with
B and the guardian said that the arrangement has been working
quite well. When the guardian had visited JA, he was very proud of
workspace and his work and his home. The guardian said that JA and his dad seem
to work really well, although there had been
incidents in March 2024 where JA
had reported to the guardian that there have been some 'physical altercations'.
The guardian reported
that JA had advised the guardian that he was physically
hit (by B) and following this the guardian had organised a welfare check,
the police were involved but that JA chose not to pursue any charges. After the
incident JA had gone to D's (and T's) house
but then decided to return to live
with B. The guardian reported that there had been no reports since.
The guardian confirmed that
JA receives support services three times a week
and there had been no reports of any incidents from the support workers
guardian reported that existing services were working well for JA and the
specialist support coordinator maintained contact with
the support services and
the guardian regarding any changes needed.
JA did not want to move out of home yet, the guardian noted that there was an
option available for JA if he wished to be
independent in the future and decided
to have his own house and supports. This was available if JA decided to leave
or if the current
arrangement broke down or if there are any further incidents
between JA and B this alternative could be arranged.
guardian submitted that there was an ongoing need for a guardian with the
existing functions of accommodation and services decision-making
for JA. The
need in respect of the services function was to participate in the NDIS
assessment meetings, and make sure JA's NDIS
plan is adequate and meets his
needs. The guardian recommended a two year order be made until JA's
finances were
response to the incidents reported by the guardian, B said he had been
the situation. B said the guardian had called him and advised him of the
welfare check but B said he did not take it seriously.
B said that two police
officers had visited their home for a welfare check and had spoken to JA and to
him separately and 'there
that JA 'might have heightened the situation, what was perhaps mistaken for a
'tap on the shoulder or something else'. B
said that JA 'does tend to embellish
situations for
attention'.
said that he asked JA on the way to the hearing what JA 'remembered about that
day and JA 'couldn't make a comment on it because
there was nothing. JA said he
not making any finding as to whether the incident was a 'tap on the
shoulder' as described by B or a 'physical altercation'
as described by the
guardian following JA's disclosure to him, I accept the guardian's evidence that
JA reported the incidents to
the guardian who was sufficiently concerned about
that report to arrange the police welfare check. I am satisfied that JA
the contact with the guardian to raise this matter. Although B says
that JA said he cannot remember the incident when he questioned
JA on the way to
the review hearing, I consider it necessary that JA continue to have access to
the guardian to raise any issues
of concern to him.
opposes the guardianship order describing it as 'a
hindrance'.
said that '[JA] recently had to have a kidney operation. The doctors couldn't
proceed. Same day or day
that there was uncertainty about whether consent was required for the surgery
from the Public Advocate's office but that
she had telephoned the office and
someone had explained that it was not
that the surgery was not
the review hearing there was no proposal for the appointment of a guardian other
than by the guardian who proposed the reappointment
of the Public Advocate.
both D and B support the revocation of the orders, I am satisfied that JA
remains in need of a guardian to make decisions
which may be required in respect
of his accommodation should there be a change needed for any reason in his
current accommodation.
The services to which he should have access are
closely aligned with his accommodation and it is appropriate that the guardian
those functions. No other needs for decision-making by a guardian have
been identified. JA's medical treatment decisions continue
to be made pursuant
to s 110ZD of the GA Act which allows treatment decisions to be made by the
person responsible, which in JA's
case are his
satisfied that a limited order in those terms meets the current needs of JA such
that a plenary order is not required.
44(5) of the GA Act provides that except where appointed to act jointly with
another person or other persons, the Tribunal
shall not appoint the Public
Advocate as a guardian unless there is no other individual who is suitable and
willing to act.
one proposed their appointment as guardian. However, even if B had proposed his
appointment in this role I am not satisfied he
could be appointed because of the
operation of s 44(1)(a) and (b) of the GA Act which requires that any
proposed appointee act in
the best interests of the represented person and not
be in a position of conflict or potential conflict with the interests of the
represented person. As I have previously found, B is responsible for the
withdrawal of JA funds and the refusal to return them to
a secure interest
accruing environment. This decision continues to be to the detriment of JA and
his immediate and long-term financial
interests. Such conduct is clearly not in
JA's best interests. I am also satisfied that there are potential conflicts
which arise
in the use of JA's funds for the purchase of the vehicle used in B's
business and in the context that JA lives with B in a shared
rental property and
B is likely reliant on JA's contribution to meet the rent and other outgoings.
B is also JA's employer. In
these circumstances an independent guardian is
required to make accommodation and services decisions for JA with a focus only
the interests of JA.
am satisfied that it is in the best interests of JA that he has an independent
guardian to have oversight of and to make decisions
in the best interests of JA
in respect of his accommodation and the services to which he has access.
the history and the current housing arrangements of JA, I am not satisfied
that any member of his family is able to provide
the independent oversight of
JA's circumstances and could act if necessary to change those housing
arrangements without reigniting
family conflict.
the recommendation of the guardian is for a two year order, I will make the
orders for five years. If the financial issues
of JA can be resolved prior
to this and both the administration and guardianship orders require review, an
application for review
can be brought. In the absence of a change in the
current circumstances of JA I see no need or benefit to JA to bring the
back for early review. JA has a lifelong intellectual disability and in
the current circumstances and in light of the history outlined
he is likely to
need independent substitute decision-makers in the longer-term.
these reasons I make the following declarations and
Tribunal declares that the represented person, [JA] is:
(a) unable,
by reason of a mental disability, to make reasonable judgments in respect of
matters relating to all of his estate; and
(b) in need of an administrator of his estate.
The Tribunal orders:
Administration
administration order dated 3 July 2020 is amended so that it now reads:
Public Trustee of 553 Hay Street, Perth, Western Australia is appointed plenary
administrator of the represented person's estate
with all the powers and duties
conferred by the
Guardianship and Administration Act 1990
administrator is authorised to expend up to a total amount of $300 per annum on
gifts on behalf of the represented person.
administration order is to be reviewed by 20 October
Guardianship
Tribunal declares that the represented person, [JA]
(a) incapable of looking after his own health and safety;
(b) unable to make reasonable judgments in respect of matters relating to his
(c) in need of oversight, care or control in the interests of his own health
and safety; and
(d) in need of a guardian.
The Tribunal orders:
guardianship order dated 3 July 2020 is confirmed as follows:
Public Advocate of David Malcolm Justice Centre, Level 23, 28 Barrack
Street, Perth, Western Australia is appointed limited guardian
represented person with the following functions:
(a) to decide where
the represented person is to live, whether permanently or temporarily;
(b) to decide with whom the represented person is to live; and
(c) to determine the services to which the represented person should have
Tribunal approves delegation by the Public Advocate of her functions as guardian
of the represented person to an officer or employee
employed in the Office of
the Public Advocate.
guardianship order is to be reviewed by 20 October 2030.
I certify that the preceding paragraph(s)
comprise the reasons for decision of the State Administrative Tribunal.
MS F CHILD, MEMBER
21 OCTOBER 2025
ts 33 - 34, 9
January 2020.
55, 9 January
January 2020.
Report of the Senior Legal Officer of the Public Trustee dated 31 August
As noted in
2020 the Public Advocate's investigator reported that JA had ceased
working in his long­term paid supported employment the day
original administration hearing, supported by B who was (and is) his carer,
without any consultation with D and was working
as an unpaid intern in B's
service provider had been
cancelled by B.
43(1)(b) and s
Act, s 4(4).
Act, s 4(7).
By the Disability Services
Commission.
In the hearing on 9 January 2020, B said the funds
were accessible to the represented person 'as and when he needs it'; ts 45, 9
2020. B also said that 'and I try and provide [the represented person]
direction into not spending savings but to accrue savings';
ts 19, 9 January
Submission from B filed 12 May 2020 (Folio 38), GAA
'Mental disability' is defined in s 3(1) of the GA Act which includes an
intellectual disability, a psychiatric condition, an acquired
brain injury and
estate is a reference to the aggregate of a person's property, their assets and
liabilities and in practice encompasses the entirety
of their real and personal
property and all of their financial affairs' (
SAL and JGL
the original hearing and on review in
August 2025.
ts 5, 26 August
August 2025.
ts 5, 26 August
August 2025.
ts 6, 26 August
August 2025.
ts 13, 26 August
January 2020.
For example, in the hearing on 9 January 2020, B said the funds were accessible
to the represented person 'as and when he needs it';
ts 45, 9 January 2020. B
also said that 'I try to provide [JA] direction into not spending savings but to
accrue savings'; ts 19,
Submission of B filed for the review January
report of the Senior Legal Officer of the Public Trustee reported in August 2023
that when the Public Trustee served summons
pursuant to
Public Trustee Act 1941
(WA) on B and JA and they were questioned about
the funds B said the funds were in a 'safe secure place' and that the funds had
moved from one location to another to protect JA . When asked about the
location of his funds, JA said the funds were in 'a safe
and secure location'.
When asked how much of the funds remained stored JA said, 'I don't
January 2020: B said that the situation was ridiculous and agreed JA's funds
belonged in a bank
33, 26 August
he had lost his home, declared bankruptcy and had lived with his brother for
three months and described that he had been
destitute. JA
2018, [74] -
transfer of a previously owned vehicle from B to JA, whichever is
JA 2020, [97] for the review hearing B again refused to accept the service of
the notice of the review hearing saying that the
Sherriff's officer had
described the notice as a summons. This will be the third time that B has
interfered with a notice of hearing
of a Tribunal hearing being given to JA.
Whether the notice was described as a summons is unclear to me. JA's own
version of this
was that '[a] Sherriff came around and kicked the car's fog
lights in'; ts 19, 26 August
85(1)(e) of the GA Act requires that there be a mandatory review of an
administration or guardianship order if a guardian
or administrator is a
bankrupt. Section 107(1)(d) requires a bankrupt donee of an enduring power of
attorney to report that bankruptcy
to the Tribunal. Implicit in these
provisions is the need to give consideration to whether a bankrupt person should
manage the finances
of another.
August 2025.
ts 16, 26 August
s 110ZD(4)(c).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (408 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter