URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WASTR/2004/61.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:08:55
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Untitled [2004] WASTR 61 (18 November 2004)
OFFICE OF THE STRATA TITLES REFEREE
Strata Titles Act 1985
[2004] WASTR 61
MR R J KRONBERGER (REFEREE)
DELIVERED :
18 NOVEMBER 2004
FILE NO/S :
ST 100 of 2004
Catchwords:
Real property - Strata titles - structure alterations -
Legislation:
Representation:
Solicitors:
Case(s) referred to in decision(s):
Case(s) also cited:
REASONS FOR DECISION – PRINCIPAL
2 Approval required for alteration to a common property
3 The Applicants are Andrew Peter Maiden and Anka Visscher as the proprietors
of Lot 2 on Strata Plan 7329 ("the Strata
Strata Plan and relevant Act
4 The Strata Plan was registered on 8 December 1981, pursuant to the
Strata Titles Act 1966
("the 1966 Act").
5 In 1985, the 1966 Act was repealed and replaced by the
Strata Titles
") which continues to be the relevant
6 In these Reasons, unless otherwise specified, all references to sections and
Schedules are, respectively, references to sections
of and Schedules to the
7 The parcel is situated at and known as "20 Bindaring Pde, Peppermint Grove".
That address is also its address for service of
notices on the Strata
8 The parcel comprises a brick-and-tile multi-storey four-lot residential
development.
9 The Applicant's Lot 2 comprises a 20m
residential portion on
the upper ground floor and a 67m
portion on the ground floor.
10 Lot 1 comprises a 148m
residential portion on the first
floor and a 38m
portion on the upper ground floor.
11 Lot 3 comprises a residential portion on the ground floor.
12 Lot 4 comprises a 210m
residential portion on the lower ground
floor and a basement portion of
Order sought
13 The Applicant has sought an Order, pursuant to
following terms:
"Seeking Order against Strata Company 7329 to permit the proprietors of Lot Two
to remove the two meter (sic) long brick wall on
the eastern end of Lot two and
replace the eastern wall with sliding glass doors to be constructed in
accordance with the architectural
and engineer's plans submitted to the strata
company. All costs of the alterations are to be paid by the proprietors of Lot
14 Plans for the proposed alterations were prepared for the Applicants in
August 2004 by Boughton Architecture and those plans
reviewed by
consulting chartered engineers Terpkos & Santillo Pty Ltd, in
August 2004. The engineers’ review
involved the
preparation and
provision of:
a) Miscellaneous Steelwork Plan and Details; and
b) Supplementary Stabilizing Portal
15 Section 85 provides:
"Where, pursuant to an application by a proprietor for an order under this
section, the referee considers that the strata company
for the scheme to which
the application relates has unreasonably refused to consent to a proposal by
that proprietor
(a) to effect alterations to the
common property; or
(b) to have carried out repairs to any damage to the common property or any
other property of the strata company,
the referee may make an order that the strata company consent to the
Applicant's proposal
16 The architect’s plans and the engineers’ report referred to
above contain details of a proposal by the Applicants
for the removal of the
central portion of the eastern end wall of the residential portion of Lot 2
and its replacement with
sliding doors.
17 The proposed works would entail the temporary propping-up of the structure
above the wall in question, the removal of the wall
and the installation of new
lintel beams.
18 Terpkos & Santillo Pty Ltd, is a report to Boughton Architecture and to
the Applicants, on 24 August 2004,
"Following your request we have considered the structural implication of
removing the existing wall on the eastern facade of the
unit and advised as
The wall currently helps support the concrete beam which supports the roof
terrace structure over and also provides lateral support
to the eastern end of
the unit. The wall can be removed and replaced with a stabilizing steel portal
that can provide the equivalent
vertical and lateral support for the eastern end
of the unit.
A suitable stabilizing portal has been designed and documented on the attached
drawings SE3 and SE3-1.
Suitable temporary propping will be necessary prior to removing the existing
wall to ensure safety to personnel and property during
the installation of the
proposed stabilizing steel portal. It is important that the works is thoroughly
pre-planned and carried out
with adequate supervision.
Please note that this solution will not compromise the other units from carrying
out similar modifications."
19 When the Strata Plan was registered, the boundaries of the lots were defined
by s 5(5) of the 1966 Act which provided
"Unless otherwise provided in the strata plan, the common boundary of a lot with
another lot or with common property shall be the
centre of the floor, wall or
ceiling as the case may be".
20 There was no provision to the contrary endorsed on the Strata Plan.
21 Section 3 of the 1966 Act defined "common property" to
"...so much of the land for the time being comprised in a strata plan as is not
comprised in a lot shown on the plan".
22 When the
replaced the 1966 Act, the transitional
provisions in Sch 3 to the
provided, in
cl 3(1), that
where a lot that had been created under the 1966 Act ("a former lot") had
boundaries as described in s
of the 1966 Act (as in the present
case), that lot became a "derived lot" having as its boundaries
"Instead of any boundary that was the centre of a floor, wall or ceiling, the
upper surface of that floor, the inner surface of that
wall or the under surface
of that ceiling as the case may be ..."
23 On that basis, Lot 3 and each part of Lots 1, 2 and 4 has, since
1985, been a cubic space having as its boundaries
the internal
surfaces referred
to above. There is no record on the Strata Plan of any re-subdivision to change
those boundaries.
24 Everything else contained in the parcel, including all the external walls of
the building, is common property.
Areas external
25 Although the Strata Plan shows common property areas respectively adjacent
to the lots and bearing endorsements indicating that
those areas are for the
exclusive use of the respectively-adjacent lots, none of those endorsements
creates any legal rights. All
proprietors, occupiers and other residents of all
the lots have an unqualified right to have access to and use of all parts of the
common property at all times, subject only to the behavioural constraints
contained in the Strata Company's by-laws.
Previous application
26 On 11 June 2004, on the application of the proprietor of
Lot 1 on the Strata Plan, under my file reference ST/2004-000049,
order allowing similar changes to a common property wall adjacent to the
residential portion of Lot 1.
27 In my Reasons for Decision in that matter, I referred to the implications
arising from a lack of a legal basis for any exclusive
use of common property,
either in respect of the external areas referred to above or in relation to the
portion of common property
that would be available when the wall in question in
that matter was removed. There is nothing on the Strata Plan to indicate that
any steps have been taken to deal with those issues.
28 It appears to me that the Strata Company should, as a matter of some
urgency, seek advice on the issues.
Applicant's
submissions
29 The Applicant's submissions include:
"There are four lots in this Strata Plan. The building is approximately 30 years
old and the units are staggered down a steep hill
designed for each one to take
advantage of the outstanding views over the Swan River.
The owners of strata lot 2 are renovating their unit and have made a submission
to the Strata Company to remove a small brick wall
in the Eastern Boundary of
the unit which substantially blocks out the views over the Swan River from the
living rooms...
The wall is not visible from any of the exterior of the complex, it is hidden by
a large alfresco balcony which is approximately
nine metres wide by six metres
long. The building faces east and has access off Bindaring Parade. There is no
road in front of the
units and therefore the wall cannot be seen by anyone other
than the residents across the river which are about a kilometre away.
Engineers have designed a stabilising steep portal and new steel support columns
as detailed in plan SE-1 to replace the brick
At an Extraordinary General Meeting on 30 August 2004, the proprietors of Lot 2
submitted Architectural and Engineers Plans to the
Strata company Council
seeking approval to remove the brick wall from the Eastern end of the unit.
Three of the four proprietors
voted in favour of the alteration, which is 75%,
but the proprietor of Lot 4 voted against the proposal.
Please note that the proprietor of Lot 4 voted in favour of a similar proposal
by the proprietor of Lot 1 at the General Meeting
on 17 April 2004 and the
proprietor of Lot 1 is able to remove her wall which is similar to the wall the
proprietors of Lot 2 are
seeking to remove...
The Minutes of the Extraordinary General Meeting of 17 April 2004
indicate, in relation to the previous
application
“... After extensive discussions the owners of unit 2 and 4 indicated that
they would be willing to allow the owner of unit
1 to remove the common property
wall at the eastern end of unit 1, provided that detailed drawings and an
engineers report was first
provide to those owners. However, the owner of unit
3 indicated that the owner would not permit any change to the common property
30 In support of their application, the Applicants have provided photographs
and a copy of the Minutes of an Extraordinary General
Meeting of the Strata
Company held on 30 August 2004. Those Minutes
"2 Decision and discussion to remove Eastern wall in unit
The Chairman labelled the structural engineer's
report and drawings by Terpkos & Santillo Pty Ltd and the architectural
by Boughton Architecture that described the proposal to remove the
common property wall at the Eastern end of unit 2. It was noted
that the report
and drawings had been provided to the owners of unit 1, 3 and 4 ahead of the
meeting. The engineers report stated
that the structural soundness of the
building would be retained if the common property wall at the Eastern end of
unit 2 was removed
and replaced with a stabilizing steel portal.
The Chairman asked Mr Andrew Boughton to explain to all of the owners the
proposal to remove the Eastern wall, as described by the
structural engineer's
report and in the drawings. Mr Andrew Boughton explained that a new stabilizing
steel portal with new supporting
steel columns would be implemented to replace
the Eastern wall. The stabilizing steel portal and new steel columns attached to
existing concrete beam and its steel support columns, which together would
allow the Eastern wall to unit 2 to be removed without
compromising the
structural integrity of the building.
After extensive discussions, the owners of units 1, 2 and 3 agreed to the
proposal to remove the Eastern wall of unit 2 in accordance
with the engineer's
report and the drawings. The owner of unit 3 did not agree to the proposal."
(NOTE: The two sentences in the last paragraph are inconsistent. On the basis
of the submissions received in response to this application,
I have assumed that
the second sentence should have referred to Lot 4, not Lot 3)
31 When the Strata Plan was registered, the Strata Company's by-laws were,
pursuant to s 15(2) of the 1966 Act, the "standard"
in the Schedule
to the 1966 Act.
32 Pursuant to the transitional provisions in Sch 3 and s 42(2), and in
the absence of any changes of by-laws having been notified
on the Strata Plan,
the by-laws of the Strata Company are now the "standard" by-laws in Sch 1
and 2 to the
Responses to
application
33 The proprietor of Lot 1 (in whose favour my order of
11 June 2004 was made in relation to the previous application)
the application in the following
"The building at 20 Bindaring Parade is approximately 30 years old.
The owners of lot 2 are seeking to remove a two metre brick wall on their
eastern elevation which is located in the centre of their
front windows. The
wall substantially restricts lovely views from the living areas within their
The owners of Lot 2 are prepared to remove this wall and replace it with a steel
portal, sliding glass doors, in accordance with
Engineer's specifications and at
no costs to the Strata Company. This is how the eastern wall should have been
constructed when the
building was first built.
The wall cannot be seen from any part of the complex, if it is removed it will
not impact structurally or in appearance on any other
residents. In fact it will
enhance the appearance of the building and increase the value of the
I am currently renovating my unit and have used the same Engineers as the Owners
of Lot 2 so that any construction issues can be
addressed by the same
I fully support the removal of the eastern elevation brick wall in Lot 2 and
consider that there will be no impact to other lot
34 The proprietor of Lot 4 has opposed the application on the basis
"I opposed the removal of the brick wall from the Eastern end of Unit 2 because
it is an integral part of the whole building supporting
the concrete slab alone
and providing lateral stability to the East end of the Unit.
The Architect of 20 Bindaring Parade referred to his design as "A Holistic (sic)
Structure" and advised minimal structural change.
I voted in favour of the same wall being removed in Unit 1 because the
circumstances are totally different. There is no building
above and no concrete
slab to be supported. I did not consider this would necessarily create a
precedent to be automatically followed
by all Unit holders as each needs to be
assessed independently.
I am not concerned with the aesthetics. My only concern is the structural
integrity of the building and any alterations that may
cause the subsequent
problems which I do not want to be liable for in the
35 There has been no response from the proprietor of
Considerations
36 The Applicants appear to have duly made their application to the Strata
Company and have obtained and provided appropriate professional
37 There has been no evidence produced which questions or challenges the
validity of the professional reports provided by the Applicants,
challenge to the findings and conclusions contained in those reports.
38 The proprietor of Lot 4 has not provided any contrary reports and,
while referring to the original architect's approach
design of the
building, has not supported that submission in any way.
39 I also note that the proprietor of Lot 4 voted in favour of the
proposal referred to in the previous application.
40 In these circumstances, it appears to me that it would be unreasonable for
the Strata Company to refuse to consent to the Applicant's
proposals, subject to
the other lot proprietors being duly protected. In that regard, without making
the generality of the orders
I propose to make, the approval of the Strata
Company insurers should be sought before any of the said works are
41 As previously pointed out, in relation to the previous application, the space
that will replace the removed wall will remain as
part of the common property.
When considering the possibility of adopting exclusive use or special privileges
by-laws under
the Strata Company should seek advice on including
that part of the common property in any grant of such rights in favour of the
Applicants.
42 Although I am prepared to grant an Order of the kind sought, I have taken
into consideration some of the issues raised by the
proprietor of Lot 4, by
expressing my order in terms that differ in some respects from the Order made by
me in the previous
application.
I have also taken into account
which allows me to express an Order in terms other than sought, so long
Order does not differ in substance from the Order sought,
allows me to include such ancillary or consequential
orders as I think fit.
43 My Order is that
"The Owners of 20 Bindaring Pde, Peppermint Grove – Strata Plan 7329 ("the
Strata Company") consent to the proposal by the
proprietor of Lot 2 on Strata
Plan 7329 ("the Strata Plan") to remove portion of the common property wall at
the eastern end of the
Upper Ground Floor portion of the said Lot 2 and to
install, in its place, sliding glass doors within a steel portal, in accordance
with the plans and building procedures and specifications of August 2004
prepared by Boughton Architects and Terpkos & Santillo
Pty Ltd, as to
respectively, the design, construction methods and materials, to be used in
connection with those works, subject to
the proprietors of Lot 2
(a) meeting all costs involved in the said
(b) indemnifying and keeping indemnified the
proprietors of all other lots on the Strata Plan from and against all costs,
risks and claims in connection with or arising from the said works;
(c) ensuring, at their cost in all respects, compliance with all local and
other government and other authority requirements and the
Strata Company’s
insurers requirements in connection with the said works.
DATED 18 November 2004
_________________________________
RJ KRONBERGER
44 STRATA TITLES REFEREE
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (84.2 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter