URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WATPAT/2004/232.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:10:22
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
ABC Developmental Learning Centres Pty Ltd v City of Canning [2004] WATPAT 232 (30 December 2004)
IN THE TOWN PLANNING
APPEAL TRIBUNAL OF
WESTERN AUSTRALIA
Appeal No. 168 of 2004
[2004] WATPAT 232
Heard: 11-12 October 2004
Decision: 30 December 2004
B E T W E E N:
ABC DEVELOPMENTAL LEARNING CENTRES PTY LTD
CITY OF CANNING
Ms B Moharich
Mr J Jordan
Mr J Adderley
(Senior Member)
(Senior Member)
(Senior Member)
child care centre – concept of non-conforming use – whether
use is a non-conforming use – concept of public need
– noise – impact on amenity – relevance of
Environmental
Protection (Noise) Regulations 1997
Cases referred to
Gretna Nominees Pty Ltd v Town of Claremont
(unreported – TPAT
Appeal No.5 of 1996, reasons published 3 September 1996)
Pinder Architects
v City of Stirling
92 LGERA 165
Norman v Gosford Shire Council
[1975] HCA 15
(1975) 31 LGRA 368
Mago and St Mellons RDC v Newport Corporation
[1952] AC 189
Cooper Brookes (Wollongong) Pty Ltd v FCT
[1981] HCA 26
Saraswati v The Queen
(1990) CLR1 at 22
and Anor v South Australian Planning Commission
[1984] HCA 76
Trustee Australia Ltd v Western Australian Planning Commission
Tempora Pty Ltd v Shire of Kalamunda
(1994) 10 SR (WA)
Appearances
Mr L Stein (instructed by Phillips Fox) appeared for the Appellant
Mr C Slarke (instructed by McLeods) appeared for the Respondent
The Tribunal:
Introduction
1. This is an appeal against the refusal of the Respondent of an application for
planning approval for a 99 place childcare centre
at Palmerston Street, St
Site Description
2. The site is more particularly described as Lot 300 on Diagram 50967, being
the whole of the land in Certificate of Title Volume
1626 Folio 900.
3. Lot 300 is 3031m
is area, and is zoned Residential R12.5/17.5
under the City of Canning Town Planning Scheme No.40
”), and Urban under the Metropolitan Region Scheme.
4. The site is located on the southern side of Palmerston Street, almost 150
metres from the T-junction of Palmerston Street and
Albany Highway.
5. On the southern side of Palmerston Street, to the east of the site (towards
Albany Highway) is Lot 301, a 15-unit single-storey
residential strata
development, of which units 11-13 are adjacent to the side boundary of Lot 300.
Beyond Lot 301 to the east are
lots whose frontage is to Albany Highway, zoned
Highway Commercial in TPS40. To the west of the site on the southern side of
Street is Lot 61, on which is developed a single residential
dwelling, a pattern which is continued for the remainder of this side
Palmerston Street.
6. The northern side of Palmerston Street is zoned Residential, and the form of
development on these lots is single residential dwellings.
7. The rear of the site abuts residential lots whose frontage is to Coolgardie
Street. These lots are Lot 103, Lot 1330,
Lot 50 and Lot
Existing Use
8. A childcare centre, called “Kidstown” already operates on the
site, pursuant to a planning approval given by the Respondent
Unfortunately the details of this approval are unknown, the Respondent
explaining that its records are incomplete for this
period. The absence of this
approval, and any possible limitations that may have been placed on the use,
have given rise to a preliminary
legal issue by the Appellant, dealt with
9. It was agreed by the parties that the use itself operates lawfully, and
currently is licensed, pursuant to the
Community Services (Child Care)
Regulations 1988
Child Care Regulations
The Proposal
10. The Appellant, a national childcare service provider, proposes to take over
the operation of the childcare centre, and it is
that proposed commercial
arrangement which has precipitated the application for planning approval which
has given rise to this appeal.
11. The application is as follows:
(a) The use of the land for 99 children, which
children aged 0 to 15 months;
12 children
aged 15 months to 2 years
15 children
aged 2 to 3 years
30 children aged 3 to 4
30 children aged 4 to 5 years;
15 after-school care places, for
children aged approximately 5 to 9 years of age. These 15 places are not in
addition to the 99 places,
but will form part of the 99 places, and will work on
the basis that some of the pre-primary children will leave early afternoon,
thereby creating vacancies for the after-school
(b) The demolition of the existing buildings on the site, which
a brick and tile building, residential in nature which is close Palmerston Road,
and according to Mr Keith Henville, the current
operator of Kidstown, is
currently used only for the cooking of meals for the
a large, industrial style
building located at the rear of the site, currently used for the childcare
an existing car park, located at
the centre of the site, accessible from Palmerston
the play area, which includes a
sand pit, play equipment and a number of small cubby houses along the boundary
with Lot 301.
(c) The construction of new facilities, consisting
new purpose-built building, and containing a number of special purpose-built
areas for each of the age-groups of children
Activity 1 (0 to 15
Activity 2 (15 months to 2
Activity 3 (2 to 3
Activity 4 (3 to 4
Activity 5 (4 to 5 years);
A media / multi-purpose after school
care room (school aged children aged up to 10 years).
3 segregated play areas, in the plans,
called ‘playscapes’,
playscape 1, located at the
rear of the site, accessible from Activity 1 and
playscape 2, located adjacent to Lot
301, accessible from Activity 2, 3, 4 and 5, which includes, a fort, sand pit,
an outdoor play
store and bike path;
playscape 3, accessible from
Activity 5, located along the front of the site.
a 29 bay carpark, along the side
boundary adjacent to Lot 61.
12. At its Council meeting on 11 May 2004, the application was refused by the
Respondent for the following reasons:
“ (i) The proposal
represents a scale and intensity of use that is beyond the capacity of a
Residential zoned property, and
does not uphold the interests of orderly and
proper planning or the preservation of the amenity of the locality.
(ii) The excessive scale of the centre would injuriously affect the amenity
of the local residential area the area (sic) in terms
of noise and traffic
generation.
(iii) The proposal does not comply with Council Policy TP-C4 ‘Child Day
Centres’ in respect to location of the facility,
hours of operation and
number of children.”
Non-conforming use argument
13. The Appellant argues that as the site is already used as a childcare centre
under an existing planning approval, this is characterised
as a non-conforming
use for the purposes of TPS40. The Appellant then says that a number of rights
at common law and under TPS40
flow from the characterisation of a use as a
non-conforming use under clause 2.4 of TPS40, which would allow the increase in
number of children at the centre without the need for further approval. The
Appellant therefore argues that it is not open to the
Tribunal to make a
determination in relation to the number of children. The Tribunal’s
extends only to the approval of the
building on the site, and not the use (or increase in intensity of the use) to
which the building
Characterisation as a
non-conforming use
14. The Appellant argues that the use is a non-conforming use as it falls within
the definition of “non-conforming use”
provided in Appendix 1 of TPS
“means the use of any land or building which was
lawful under the provisions of an earlier town planning scheme affecting the
land and/or enjoyed non-conforming use rights under that scheme”.
15. The use was approved in 1975, pursuant to TPS16, at which time the use was
lawful, in that, as the parties have agreed, planning
approval had been given.
Under TPS40, the use of the land is classified as an SA use, which means that it
is not permitted unless
approval is given by the Council, after advertising of
the proposal has taken place and any submissions received as a result of that
advertising are considered.
16. The Appellant argues that there is no need for the use to have become
prohibited under the current scheme in order for it to
be properly characterised
as a non-conforming use according to the definition provided.
Literal Interpretation v Intent of Provision
17. If the Appellant’s literal approach is taken, it would lead to a
situation where
use which was lawful under a previous scheme (and
regardless of whether that use is prohibited or permitted under the current town
planning scheme) would be a non-conforming use.
18. Such a wide interpretation belies the intent of clause 2.4, which is to
ensure the lawful continuance of uses that would otherwise
not be permissible
upon the commencement of a new planning scheme or amendment thereto, and allows,
subject to the listed restrictions,
the extension of that use, and development
involved in the extension of that use.
19. For the definition to be given meaning, non-conformity under the current
planning scheme must be implied.
20. The intent of the provision is implicit from the actual words
“non-conforming use”, if not from the definition itself.
implicit from a reading of clause 2.4 in its entirety. As discussed above, the
intention of clause 2.4 is to maintain
the lawfulness of uses which would not
otherwise be permissible under the current scheme. What then is the purpose of
giving “non-conforming
use” its wide interpretation, when uses that
remain in conformity with the current scheme are still considered lawful and do
not need any special exemptions or protection?
21. The meaning is also implicit from a reading of clause 2.4.6.1, which sets
out the circumstances where a non-conforming use is
discontinued, and provides
“when a non-conforming use of any land or building
has been discontinued for a period exceeding six months such land or building
shall not thereafter be used other than in conformity with the provisions of
”. (emphasis added)
22. This reference to conformity in clause 2.4.6.1 creates the inference that a
non-conforming use is not in conformity with the
23. Clause 2.4.5.1, in relation to the change of one non-conforming use to
another, also creates the inference that a non-conforming
use must not otherwise
be open to be permitted:
“The Council may grant its
approval to the change of the use of any land from one non-conforming use to
another non-conforming
which would not otherwise be
permissible
...” (emphasis added).
24. Absurd conclusions are reached in using the literal approach to a number of
the provisions of clause 2.4, including:
(a) Clause 2.4.5.1 – which allows the change of one non-conforming use for
another – on the Appellant’s wide interpretation,
this would allow
approval to change the use of land from a conforming to a non conforming use,
which was otherwise prohibited by
TPS40, thereby removing any meaningful
application of X uses in the zoning table.
(b) Clause 2.4.6.1 – which sets out the circumstances where non-conforming
use rights lapse because of discontinuance –
on the Appellant’s wide
interpretation, this provision would be rendered meaningless by extinguishing
non-conforming use rights
where there has been a discontinuance of the
non-conforming use on the one hand, but allowing any further use of the land to
conformity with the Scheme.
Interpretation
Interpretation Act 1984
“Regard to be had to purpose or object
In the interpretation of a provision of a written law, a construction that
would promote the purpose or object underlying the written
law (whether that
purpose or object is expressly stated in the written law or not) shall be
preferred to a construction that would
not promote that purpose or
26. In this case however, it is not a matter simply of preferring one
interpretation over another – to give effect to the purpose
or object of
the definition, words need to be implied into the definition itself.
27. It is apposite to point out, at this stage the status of a town planning
scheme in the hierarchy of written law.
Section 7(3)
Town Planning and
Development Act 1928
“A town planning scheme
or amendment to a town planning scheme, when approved by the Minister and
published in the
, shall have full force and effect as if it were
enacted by this Act.”
28. It is clear that filling gaps in legislation should be attempted with the
greatest of caution. The view of Lord Symonds in
Mago and St Mellons RDC v
Newport Corporation
[1952] AC 189
at 191, “If a gap is disclosed, the
remedy lies in an amending Act”, has been cited in Australian courts
29. However, in the decision of
Cooper Brookes (Wollongong) Pty Ltd v FCT
[1981] HCA 26
(1981) 35 ALR 151
, the High Court read words into legislation to avoid an
outcome which it believed was not consistent with the Legislature’s
intentions. In this judgment, Mason and Wilson JJ
“when the judge labels the operation of the statute
as ‘absurd’, ‘extraordinary’, ‘capricious’,
‘irrational’ or ‘obscure’ he assigns a ground for
concluding that the legislature could not have intended
such an operation and
that an alternative interpretation must be preferred. But the propriety of
departing from the literal interpretation
is not confined to situations
described by these labels. It extends to any situation in which for good reason
the operation of the
statute on a literal reading does not conform to the
legislative intent as ascertained from the provisions of the statute, including
the policy which may be discerned from those provisions.”
30. In citing the above passage in the decision of
Saraswati v The Queen
(1990) CLR1 at 22, Gaudron J stated:
“Moreover, once a
court concludes that the literal or grammatical meaning of a provision does not
conform to the legislative
purpose as ascertained from the statute as a whole
including the policy which may be discerned from its provisions, it is entitled
to give effect to that purpose by addition to, omission from, or clarification
of, the particular provision.”
31. It is clear to the Tribunal in the context of the rest of TPS40, that the
meaning given to “non-conforming use” in
Appendix 1 does not merely
produce anomalies, but creates an absurdity, in rendering much of TPS40 either
meaningless or superfluous.
From a reading of the whole of clause 2.4 of TPS40
it is clear that the purpose is to give protection to the continuation of those
uses which no longer could be approved under TPS40. Therefore, it is our view
that the definition of “non-conforming use”
“means the use of any land or building which was lawful
under the provisions of an earlier town planning scheme affecting the
and is not in conformity with the current town planning
Is use in conformity with TPS40?
32. This being the position, the next question to ask is whether this use is
permissible under TPS40.
33. It was pursuant the City of Canning Town Planning Scheme No.16
”) that the original planning approval for a child
care centre was given in 1975. Under TPS16, which came into force on 16 October
1973, the land was zoned Residential Class 2. In the Residential Class 2 zone, a
Day Care Centre was an SA use. Under TPS16, “Day
Care Centre” was
defined as:
“..shall have the meaning given to it by the
Child Welfare (Care Centres) Regulations, 1968.”
Child Welfare (Care Centres) Regulations 1968
defined a Day Care
“..means a child minding centre that is not a
family care centre or an occasional care centre”.
35. A Child Day Care Centre is defined in TPS40 as:
any land or building used for the daily or occasional care of children in
accordance with the relevant legislation relating
to Child Day Care”.
36. It is therefore apparent that the uses in TPS16 and TPS40 are similar in
definition, and the change in wording does not of itself
cause a conflict which
would give rise to non-conformity with TPS40.
37. As noted previously, under TPS40, the land is zoned Residential, and in this
zone in TPS40, a Child Day Care Centre is an SA
use. In TPS40, clause 2.2.3(a),
an SA use is one that:
“...is not permitted unless approval
is granted by the Council and the Council has followed the procedures required
by paragraph
2.3.7.1 and, where applicable, had regard to the provisions of
subclause 2.3.8.”
38. Mr Stein, for the Appellant, says that the fact that the use is “not
permitted unless approval is granted” amounts
to the use being a
non-conforming use for the purpose of TPS40. It is clear from a reading of the
zoning table in TPS40, that most
uses are either AA or SA uses. The fact that
approval is required is not, in our view, determinative of whether a use is
non-conforming,
or not permissible.
39. On a reading of clause 2.4, together with clause 2.2, although approval may
be required for particular uses, this does not mean
that they are not in
conformity with TPS40. Indeed, by assigning an AA or SA categorisation, TPS40
confirms the fact that they are
contemplated uses within the particular
40. For these reasons it is our view that the use of the land for Child Day Care
Centre under TPS40 is not a non-conforming use,
and therefore does not gain the
benefits the Appellant says flow from this
characterisation.
Is approval required for the development of
the land and intensification of the non-conforming use?
41. If the Tribunal is incorrect in its analysis of the proposal as not being a
non-conforming use, then it is necessary to look
at the second limb of the
Appellant’s argument.
42. Once a non-conforming use is established, the Appellant contends, the use
gains the benefit of both common law rights and clause
2.4.2 of TPS40. These
benefits, the Appellant says, are, without further development approval
(a) expand the use to the boundaries of the lot; and
(b) intensify the activities that make up the use, as long as it is for the same
43. The Appellant referred the Tribunal to the 1984 decision of the High Court
Dorrestijn and Anor v South Australian Planning Commission
[1984] HCA 76
54 LGRA 99.
In this case the High Court held that any development necessarily involved in
the continuation of a non-conforming use
is protected
from the requirement of
further development approvals. Mr Stein argued that this decision illustrated
the primacy, or
placed upon the protection of a
non-conforming use – that is, that it may develop further without the
for further approvals
for its intensification. Mr Stein contended that this
principle applied to the current appeal, and was
to be read down only in so
as clause 2.4.2.3 applied (in relation to approval for further development, not
44. The decision in
related to the continuing use of land for
rural purposes, and the form of development in dispute was the clearing of
vegetation,
which under the relevant town planning scheme was defined as
development. It is the Tribunal’s view that
distinguished from the facts in this appeal. This is because in
, the continuation of the non-conforming use inherently
involved further activities on the land which separately constituted further
“development” of the land. Put another way, the decision in
confirmed only that incidental actions which would otherwise
be classified as “development” in their own right are protected
the non-conforming use provisions where they intrinsically relate to the
continuation of the non-conforming use itself. It is
for this reason that Mason
ACJ, Deane and Dawson JJ state “And it conforms to the principle of
construction that statutory
provisions designed to protect and preserve existing
rights should be as liberally construed as the language and the context
45. In this appeal, there is no necessity for further development or extension
of the non-conforming use in order to ensure its continuation,
and therefore the
views expressed in
are not on point.
46. Clause 2.4.2 of TPS40 provides
relevantly:
“Restrictions on Non-Conforming Uses
2.4.2.1 If at the Gazettal date...(“the relevant date”) the use of
any land or building is a non-conforming use, that
use may continue, subject to
the following restrictions:
(a) the non-conforming use shall not be extended beyond the boundaries of the
lot or lots upon which it was carried on at the relevant
2.4.2.2 Nothing in this subclause shall be taken to excuse any person from
complying with the provisions in other clauses of this
Part relating to
applications for and approvals of uses and proposals to commence development of
2.4.2.3 An application for Development Approval involving the extension of a
non-conforming use shall, without affecting the generality
of the provisions in
this clause, be dealt with by the Council as if it involved an “AA”
use, and in accordance with
the provisions of the Scheme relating to
determination of applications for “AA”
47. The Appellant argues that clause 2.4.2 (set out above) protects the
extension of a non-conforming use to the extent expressed
in clause 2.4.2.1, and
approval is required in clause 2.4.2.3 for “development” approval
48. The Appellant says that TPS40 deals separately with the requirement to gain
approval for development (clause 2.3.1) and use (clause
2.3.2). As clause
2.4.2.3 refers only to the requirement for “development approval”,
there is no requirement to obtain
further approval for the intensification of
49. There is no doubt that the drafting of clause 2.4.2 is inelegant. However,
it is incorrect to say that TPS40 requires separate
approval for use and
development. Clause 2.3.2.1 provides:
“For the purpose of
this Scheme the commencement, carrying out or change of a use on land shall be a
development notwithstanding
that it does not involve the carrying out of any
building or other works”.
50. This clause confirms that the use of land requires “development
approval” as it is called, and reflects the definition
“development” in Appendix 1 of TPS40, which refers to
Town Planning and Development Act 1928
. “Development” is
to mean the “development or use of any
Extension v Intensification
51. The next question to be asked is whether clause 2.4.2.1 exempts both
“extension” and “intensification”
of a non-conforming
52. The question is whether “extension” as it is referred to in
clause 2.4.2 relates to an extension in a physical sense
to additional land, or
whether it also refers to an intensification of the use itself, with no physical
53. From a reading of clause 2.4.2.1, the term is used in relation to the
physical extension of a use, rather than an intensification
of that use.
Therefore, it is my view that clause 2.4.2 does not offer the Appellant
protection.
54. The question remains, though, if the use is established to be a
non-conforming use, whether further approval is required for
the intensification
of that use. The Appellant referred the Tribunal to the decision in
Nominees Pty Ltd v Town of Claremont
(unreported – TPAT Appeal No.5 of
1996, reasons published 3 September 1996), which helpfully sets out the leading
in relation to this question. In
Norman v Gosford Shire Council
[1975] HCA 15
(1975) 31 LGRA 368
, the High Court suggested that as long as the purpose of
the non-conforming use remains the same, there is no requirement
approval of subsequent intensification of the non-conforming use.
55. This principle would certainly be correct in a situation where no planning
approval was given (and therefore no conditions of
approval limiting the use are
in existence), and where the definition of the use itself did not impose any
limits on the intensity
of the use, as was the case in
56. However, where the non-conforming use was constrained by either its
conditions of approval, or by the definition of the use itself
previous planning instrument, further intensification of the non-conforming use
must require further approval.
57. Even where there are no conditions of approval or scheme definitions
constraining the use, that which is approved must reflect
that which was applied
for. Therefore, the non-conforming use must be constrained by the reality of the
approval given.
58. As noted above, the City has no record of the details of the planning
approval issued in 1975 or thereabouts, no record of whether
the application or
approval limited the numbers of children, nor of any further development
application to increase the numbers of
children to be accommodated on the site.
59. On this basis, if it was the case that the use of land was a non-conforming
use, then the Appellant’s argument regarding
the requirement for further
approval for the intensification of the use could be made out, on the basis that
the purpose of the intensified
use is the same, and in the absence of further
evidence as to any constraints on the approval given.
need argument
60. The Appellant also submitted that the proposal fulfilled a public need, and
argued that the provision of a public use would override
any diminution of the
amenity of the surrounding residents. The basis of this argument is the Supreme
Court’s decision in
Pinder Architects v City of Stirling
In this case, the Supreme Court, in allowing a hostel for Aboriginal
people, held that where a need is established
for a use that
characterised as a public use, that that need should be balanced against any
impact on the amenity of the immediate
public use is to be allowed which does have some impact on amenity, there must
be shown to be a need for that use in that
location to balance against the
negative effect.”
61. The first element of this test is to establish whether the use can be
characterised as a ‘public use’.
62. Mr Slarke, for the Respondent referred the Tribunal to the following
paragraph at page 173 of the decision as being the test
as to whether a use is a
‘public use’:
“It is apparent that the term
“public use” as used by the Tribunal
refers to non-commercial
community facilities which service particular needs of the public in general or
a relevant sector of the
, such as a school, church, hospital,
boarding house or hostel.” (emphasis added)
63. Mr Stein referred the Tribunal to another paragraph of the same decision,
at page 172, which provided:
“The extent or the dimension
of a use that converts the enquiry into one concerning the public interest
depends, of course,
on each case.”
64. The Appellant tendered as an annexure to Mr Jones’ witness statement a
report written by Urbis JHD, which it says shows
a need for a child care centre
of the size proposed in the St James area. Under cross-examination, Mr Jones
agreed that the report
was prepared to identify development opportunities for
the Appellant, rather than to determine the particular needs of the public.
another way, the report identifies commercial demand rather than public
65. The difficulty in this case is that the use is both commercial in nature,
and services the need of the public. There are many
such uses which, though
commercial in nature, display elements of public need, rather than, or in
conjunction with, commercial demand.
Such uses include medical clinics and child
care centres.
66. The test as laid down by the Supreme Court in 1994 in
Pinder Architects
is that the use must be non-commercial in nature to gain the benefit of the
“public need v adverse impact on amenity of immediate
balance. The problem is in determining whether the
non-commercial, rather than the operator of the use, in light of the fact the
approval, if given, will run with the land as a
right in rem.
could be operated in either a commercial, or non-commercial way – this
being particularly so in an era where even the most
basic of public utilities
are operated by private corporations in a commercial environment.
67. The test of commerciality therefore becomes difficult to meaningfully apply,
because no use (of itself) could properly be non-commercial.
68. In any event, the Tribunal has not been satisfied on the evidence given by
the Appellant that the provision of child care satisfies
the test set down in
Pinder Architects
as providing a public need as opposed to commercial
Legislative Framework
Town Planning Scheme 40
69. As noted above the application is governed by the Respondent’s TPS40.
70. Under TPS40, the use of land for a child care centre is an SA use in the
Residential zone. Clauses 2.3.7 and 2.3.8 set out the
procedure, and the
considerations that are required to be taken into account in determining a
development application. These include,
relevantly:
(a) The interests of orderly and proper planning and the preservation of the
amenity of the relevant locality: clause 2.3.8.1(a);
(b) The comments of any objectors to or supporters of the application: clause
2.3.8.2(e);
(c) The nature of the proposed use and its relationship to the use of other land
within the locality: clause 2.3.8.3(a);
(d) The nature of the roads giving access to the subject land: clause
2.3.8.3(c);
(e) The parking facilities available or proposed and the likely requirements for
parking, arising from the proposed development:
2.3.8.3(d).
71. In addition to these general considerations, clause 5.4.3 provides (in part)
“ The erection of or use of a building or land in a Residential
zone......should also be generally in accordance with the
following performance
The scale and intensity of uses
and buildings should be compatible
with the proposed uses and buildings permitted under the maximum residential
density in that locality,
and be compatible with surrounding development in
terms of streetscape and screening; and
(c) Adequate and conveniently situated off street car parking areas are provided
for any development permitted in residential areas.”
Planning Policies
72. Clause 2.7.12 of TPS40 gives the Respondent power to make planning policies.
Relevant to this appeal is Policy TP-C4: Child Day
Care Centres
73. Clause 2.3.8.1(c) of TPS40 requires in considering an application that
“due regard” is given to a planning policy
made under clause 2.7.12.
This must be read with clause 2.7.12.4, which provides:
planning policy shall not bind the Council in respect of any application for
development approval but the Council shall take
into account the provisions of
the policy and objectives which the policy was designed to achieve before making
its decision.”
74. The objective of TP-C4 is:
“To ensure Child Day Care
Centres, situated within or adjacent to Residential zones, are located and
designed to ensure compatibility
with residential uses, whilst being safe and
easily accessible.”
75. TP-C4 then sets out a number of criteria against which proposals should be
tested. These include, relevantly:
“(i) Location
- Child Day Care Centres should be encouraged to locate within or near
commercial, community or recreational centres.
(ii) Site Characteristics
- The site to have a regular shape with a minimum lot area of
and a frontage of 20m providing opportunity to design the
centre and minimise impact on surrounding properties.
(iii) Amenity
- Within Residential zones, the design of the building is to have a domestic
appearance with a maximum 25% site coverage.
- In order to minimize noise impact on surrounding properties, Council will
require the erection of suitable fencing, orientation
of openings to rooms which
may create unreasonable noise levels, such as play areas, away from the adjacent
residential properties,
and the provision of suitable setbacks.
- Within Residential zones days and times of operation to be restricted to
Monday-Friday, from 7.00am-6.00pm, and Saturday 7.30am-12.30pm.
The maximum number of children to be accommodated in Child Day Care Centres
within Residential zones to be limited to 25 persons provided
that the numbers
may be increased to 40 where the proposal satisfies the following criteria:
(a) Impacts on nearby residents are reduced due to the site abutting
non-residential land uses on one or more boundary; and
(b) Size or shape of the lot and the nature of existing vegetation permits
the design of buildings and play areas that will ensure
minimum interference on
the amenity of surrounding properties.”
76. The Appellant attacked TP-C4 on the basis that the limit of 25 children was
arbitrary, and nowhere was any evidence as to why
this number was chosen.
77. Mr Devenish, a town planner at the City of Canning explained in evidence
“the reference to 25 and 40...children respectively
within the policy are far from arbitrary. They're not arbitrary. They're
on a traditional pattern of child care services and ... in the past, centres
within residential areas have been of that smaller
The policy respects what has traditionally been accepted. The council - - my
office took the initiative of reviewing the policy in
view of that changed trend
- - in view that applications were emerging for larger centres and we sought to
get in before developments
of this nature came about in order to preserve the
amenity of residential areas. So, I think there is some foundation to the
that are cited in the policy...”
78. On this basis, the Tribunal accepts TP-C4 as being properly made, and one
that should be taken into account in accordance with
the principle set out in
Permanent Trustee Australia Ltd v Western Australian Planning Commission
(1998) 20 SR(WA)192.
Other legislation
79. Reference was also made by the parties to the
Environmental Protection
(Noise) Regulations 1997
Noise Regulations
pursuant to the
Environmental Protection Act 1986
. Their application is
discussed below.
Assessment of Merits
80. Under both TPS40, and TP-C4, the impact on amenity is required to be taken
into account in considering the proposal. Those elements
that impact on amenity
will differ from location to location, and in accordance with that which is
proposed. In this case, those
elements have been identified by the Respondent
in its reasons for refusal as being unacceptable noise, traffic and car parking
hours of operation, caused, in the Respondent’s view, by the number of
children proposed.
81. As noted by Mr Stein for the Appellant, amenity is an objective test to be
taken into consideration by the Tribunal having regard
to the decision in
Tempora Pty Ltd v Shire of Kalamunda
(1994) 10 SR (WA) 296.
82. “Amenity” is defined in TPS40 as:
the quality and the conditions and characteristics of the locality which
contribute to its pleasantness and harmony and
its better enjoyment”.
Definition of locality
83. In order to properly assess the amenity of a locality, that locality must
first be defined.
84. Mr R Dixon, a town planning consultant for the Appellant, took a broad view
in determining the locality within which the subject
site is located, taking
into account the whole suburb of St James and portion of the suburb of Bentley.
(witness statement: R Dixon
- para 10.1 and 10.8)
85. Mr Devenish, for the Respondent, was of the view that the locality was less
extensive for the purpose of assessing amenity. It
was his view that the
locality was limited to that area which was likely to be impacted upon by the
proposal. The consultation process
undertaken by the City of Canning was limited
to notification of 44 property owners considered to be potentially affected by
application. Of these properties, 21 responses were recorded.
86. Indeed, because of the less than 50% consultation response rate, it is
reasonable for the Tribunal to accept that the locality
sensitive to amenity
impact is something less than the original consultation area.
87. Put another way, it is the Tribunal’s view that the locality for the
purpose of assessing amenity is that area affected
by noise or traffic movements
likely to be generated by the proposal, that is, properties on Palmerston Street
and those fronting
Coolgardie Street adjoining or located in proximity to Lot
Assessment of Current Amenity of Locality
88. The parties had differing views on the current amenity of the locality,
largely due to their differing view on how the locality
should be defined.
89. It was the Appellant’s contention that the amenity was defined by a
predominantly residential land use with a mix of non-residential
land use such
as offices, car sales and the like in the proximity of Albany Highway, with low
open space provision. Streets in the
vicinity of Albany Highway have wider
carriageways and “sporadic” provision of street trees. The amenity
of the area
may be said to be in the state of transition because of replacement
of older traditional homes with unit developments, or subdivisions
provision of second homes at the rear of lots. The existing child-care centre on
Lot 300 Palmerston Street is, in itself,
a legitimate factor contributing to the
amenity of the area: witness statement: R Dixon – para 10.8.1 –
90. Mr Devenish expressed the view that west of Melbourne Street, Palmerston
Street became a typical, local residential road with
commensurate amenity
expectations.
91. In our view, the amenity of the locality is that of a largely
single-dwelling residential area, with some higher density residential
existing child-care facility on Lot 300. While we agree that the amenity of
Palmerston Street diminishes towards Albany Highway,
it is clear to us that west
of Melbourne Street where the road pavement width decreases from 10 metres to 8
metres (where Lot 300
is located), but for the child-care facility, the amenity
becomes that of a normal residential street.
92. As noted above, TP-C4 suggests a restriction on operating hours of childcare
centres of 7am to 6pm Monday to Friday, and 7:30am
to 12:30pm on Saturdays.
93. The proposed hours of operation of this childcare centre are 6.30am to
6.30pm Monday to Friday 52 weeks of the year, except for
public holidays.
94. One reason given for the hours of operation was that this enabled workers in
occupations with an early start to drop off their
child before work. Mr Jones,
a Development Manager for the Appellant who gave evidence, said that such
workers usually collected
their child at about 2.30pm. Office workers drop their
children off later, but might collect them at about 6pm.
95. Mr Jones said that a further important reason for the chosen hours of
operation was that a parent “buys a 12 hour day”
for their child.
This set day was said to relate to the cost structure and available subsidies
and allowances. How this actually
worked, however, was not made particularly
clear. Mr Jones said the Appellant’s concern was to have a 12 hour day. It
inconvenience some but convenience others if the hours of operation were
changed to 7am to 7pm.
96. It was explained that the day would commence with two staff arriving just
before 6.30am to prepare the centre for the arrival
of children. Any cleaning
and tidying would have been completed the night before after the children had
left. From this it would
appear that activity extends beyond the 12 hour day
that the children will be on the premises and children are likely to be on site,
at least from when the doors open.
97. As discussed below in relation to noise, it is apparent car park activities
before 7am are unlikely to comply with the Noise
Regulations. The Appellant
suggested that noise from the centre before 7am could be controlled by
appropriate management procedures.
Although not explored in any depth it was
apparent that the measures would depend upon the staff opening the premises and
arrivals behaving in an appropriate manner rather than some adaptation
of the design or layout of the proposed centre.
98. The Tribunal is of the view that the need to cater for some parents and to
accommodate the Appellant’s 12 hour day are
not sufficient to overcome the
need to preserve what is normally expected to be quiet time in a residential
99. Mr Stein, in closing, said a 6.30am start might be too early. He considered
the effects of this start time could be ameliorated,
but the Appellant would
accept a 7am start if the Tribunal considered it necessary.
100. It is our view that if this development were to be approved a 7am start
should be stipulated. As to closing time, there was
no evidence produced that
pointed to a material difference between the effect of a 6.30pm closing time and
a 7pm closing time.
101. Palmerston Street, according to evidence of the Appellant’s witness
Mr Bordbar, a transport planning and engineering consultant,
is an Access Road
with a maximum desirable traffic volume of 3,000 vehicles per day
”), based on criteria assigned by the Main Roads WA
Functional Road Hierarchy. Palmerston Street is further classified in accordance
with Liveable Neighbourhood Guidelines as a Wider Access Street with a traffic
volume threshold of 3,000 vpd.
102. The current traffic volume for Palmerston Street between Albany Highway and
Melbourne Street is 1020 vpd, thus signifying, according
to Mr Bordbar,
significant spare capacity for this road.
103. Mr Bordbar gave further evidence that the traffic thresholds for streets
such as Palmerston Street are established considering
a number of issues
including efficiency of movement, interaction of all modes of transport,
accessibility and amenity.
104. Mr Bordbar calculated that the net increase of traffic attributable to the
proposed new child-care centre would be between 248
and 278 vehicle trips per
day. Based on the existing traffic volumes for Palmerston Street, Mr Bordbar
demonstrated that the increase
of traffic was well within the design capacity of
the street and that the proportional increase of traffic volume was 19-22%.
statement: B Bordbar – paras 5.13 and 5.14).
105. The increase in traffic volume was described by Mr Bordbar as insignificant
considering the function and standard of Palmerston
Street. Noise associated
with the extra traffic would be what is expected on a street of this type and
considering the low level
of traffic increase and the time periods that the vast
majority of this traffic is traveling on the road, the impact of noise is
considered to be insignificant.
106. It was also Mr Bordbar’s view that any traffic movements associated
with the early opening of the child-care centre at
6.30am would not be
significant because of the extremely low numbers of movements expected at that
time of the morning.
107. The Respondent’s argument, so far as traffic movement on Palmerston
Street is concerned, was to highlight the significance
of the proportionate
increase of traffic movements attributable to the proposed child-care centre and
the consequent impact on amenity
that owners and occupiers of residences
fronting Palmerston Street would be able to discern.
108. Witnesses for the Respondent were generally silent on the matter of traffic
increase on Palmerston Street attributable to the
proposed child-care centre.
The list of submissions incorporated in attachments to Mr Devenish’s
witness statement (SPD 7 and
12) reveals three objections due to specific
concerns relating to increased traffic in surrounding streets.
109. No substantive evidence was otherwise proffered by the Respondent to
challenge the evidence of Mr Bordbar in relation to the
impact on amenity of
increased traffic on Palmerston Street attributable to the proposal. In the
circumstances, the Tribunal is inclined
to accept the Appellant’s argument
that the increase in traffic numbers, whilst proportionally of some substance,
well within the parameters of road classification and design capacity
expected of a typical residential environment.
generated on site
110. Aspects of the proposal, which have been identified in the appeal as
potentially contributing to noise impact,
(a) Additional traffic movements, both for car parking on site (and the
additional drop-offs and pick-ups of children) and on Palmerston
associated with the increased scale of the centre,
(b) The noise from children playing in outdoor play areas of the centre adjacent
to residential dwellings.
111. Relevant to the above two issues is the Appellant’s proposal to
commence operation at 6:30am.
112. As noted previously the issue of noise is relevant insofar as it complies
with the Noise Regulations, and also, in a general
sense, how it complies with
the standard of amenity of the locality, as contemplated by TPS40 and the
113. The Respondent is of the view that the location and use of the play areas
within the development will create a detrimental effect
on the amenity (insofar
as it relates to noise) of the surrounding neighbours to Lot 300.
114. In relation to play areas, the Appellant has responded to the TP-C4
requirement to minimize noise impact on surrounding properties,
by explaining
that the design of the child-care centre incorporates noise mitigating features
“ - The erection of suitable fencing, including
masonry fencing to 2m in height along the common boundary of the land with lot
301 Palmerston Street.
- The orientation of openings to rooms to ensure staged use of the three
outside playscape areas at different times of the day and
the internal fencing
of play areas to further coordinate their use. In this sense the location of
these rooms and orientation to
playscape areas will not create unreasonable
noise levels.
- The site layout maximizes solar orientation and minimizes the extent of
outdoor areas abutting the surrounding residences to primarily
one side of the
(witness statement: R Dixon – para 9.21)
115. Mr Dixon further explained that in comparison to the existing child-care
centre play areas that are currently spread across
the land with little if any
noise attenuation features, the proposed play areas are located in one area and
will be associated with
a 2 metre high masonry wall on the property boundary to
minimize noise impact.
116. Mr Henville gave evidence that currently all 36 children attending the
centre are supervised as one group and often play in
the external play area
along the north eastern boundary which corresponds with the play areas proposed
under the new application.
The boundary separation between the play area and
adjoining residences is a 1.7 metre ‘super six’ fence. Mr Henville
described the centre’s operating time as 7am to 6pm and that outdoor play
times were 8.30am to 10am and 4pm to 5.30pm, weather
permitting.
117. Under the proposal, rather than one central play area for all children, the
play areas are to be segregated according to age.
118. Mr Jones provided evidence that the operational level for the centre would
be 80 children, notwithstanding the intention to
seek a licence for 99 children.
Of these 80 children, not all will be on the premises at the one time. 20
– 25 children will
be under 2 years of age and will not be placed in the
outdoor playscape areas. In Mr Jones’ experience there will never be
than 30 or 40 children within the playscape areas at any one time and these
children will be located within three distinct and
independently fenced
playscape areas.
119. Activity in the outdoor play areas was examined at some length before the
Tribunal, with Mr Jones acknowledging that outdoor
activity could occupy up to
five hours per day commencing at about 10.30am. It is notable though, that Mr
Jones’ witness statement
at paragraph 52 signals that the Appellant would
accept a condition of approval “that precludes children from playing
the playscape areas prior to 7am”. It would therefore be
anticipated that the outdoor play areas could well be used for a considerably
greater span of hours than otherwise suggested by Mr Jones.
120. The Tribunal heard evidence from adjoining residents to Lot 300, who gave
evidence on behalf of the Respondent. Mr P Robinson
of 13 Coolgardie Street
testified to the nuisance of children playing at the existing centre
“yelling and screaming”.
Mr Robinson told the Tribunal that he
prefers not to open the back door of his house in summer while the children are
playing because
he cannot concentrate on activities such as reading or talking
on the telephone. The new proposal will continue the circumstance
that the play
area will adjoin Mr Robinson’s back yard, but in his opinion the situation
will be worse because there will be
more children and outdoor play will occupy
most of the day.
121. Mr R Waite of Unit 12, No. 6 Palmerston Street adjoining the north east
boundary of the existing centre, also testified to “the
noise of children
screaming, crying and yelling, and carers yelling at the children”.
Similarly to Mr Robinson, Mr Waite described
being unable to talk on the
telephone without keeping the back door closed and being unable to spend time
outside during play periods.
Mr Waite was also of the opinion that the proposal
associated with the new centre to rotate children in groups in the play areas
would mean he would have to put up with continuous noise throughout the day.
Under cross-examination, Mr Waite acknowledged that
he had not made any
complaint in relation to noise from the centre, but explained that he thought a
complaint would not be possible
against a previously existing use.
122. Objections to the proposed child-care centre received by the City of
Canning relating to concerns about noise were responded
to by Mr Dixon with
substantial reliance upon a report prepared by Mr T Reynolds of Herring Storer
Acoustics which indicated that
noise levels would be well within statutory
required limits.
123. Mr Reynolds, an acoustic engineer, gave evidence on behalf of the
Appellant. Mr Reynolds had undertaken noise modelling of the
development, and had produced a noise assessment report (“
124. The essential conclusions of the noise report based on an exercise of
acoustic modeling of child play noise and car park noise,
was that the predicted
resultant noise levels of children playing, measured at noise sensitive
premises, “are equal to or less
than 48 dB(A)
provided the
boundary fence is 1.8m high”, and in the case of noise levels from car
park activities, “the predicted noise
emission levels at noise sensitive
premises are equal to or less than 68 dB(A)L
”. The report
therefore concluded that the relevant noise emission levels to be expected from
the proposed child-care centre
complied with criteria set out in the Noise
Regulations.
125. The modelling by Mr Reynolds was based on an assumption of a maximum 40
children occupying the play areas at any one time. The
acoustic modeling of
child play noise was made on the basis of evenly distributing the sound power
level as a plane source over the
play area in order to ensure that the noise
energy is not located near the boundary wall and the effectiveness of the wall
as a barrier
is not over predicted.
126. Mr Reynolds acknowledged that his report did not seek to address the
question of acceptable amenity, rather he had prepared
the report to assess the
proposal in the context of the Noise Regulations. In this regard he accepted
that noise is a subjective
matter and it would be hard to answer whether noise
might be unreasonable even if compliant with the Noise Regulations.
127. The Respondent’s argument in relation to on site noise generation
sought to challenge aspects of the Herring Storer report.
Mr P Keswick, an
acoustic engineer and Principal Engineer at SVT Engineering Consultants, gave
evidence on behalf of the Respondent
and queried the assumption of the Herring
Storer report that acoustic modeling of child play noise was appropriately
conducted as
a plane source. Mr Keswick said that:
distributed noise source over the play area is a conservative assessment of the
likely noise emission from the play area.
A more realistic approach would be to
assess the effect of children playing in groups within the play fort, sand pit
etc. A concentrated
noise assessment would result in higher noise levels
impacting the adjacent residents of between 3 and 6 dB(A) higher than those
predicted”.
128. It was Mr Keswick’s view that the practical effect of noise
generation by children playing in groups, as described, may
not comply with the
Noise Regulations, and accordingly the proponent should review if the current
location of the play area is appropriate.
Mr Keswick also noted that the Herring
Storer report had not reviewed the impact of maximum noise levels from the
activities.
129. In relation to the noise modelling, it seems more persuasive to the
Tribunal, that the natural disposition of child play would
be to congregate in
groups closely around play equipment such as sand pits or play forts or other
attractive play features. As a
result the sounds of child play may well be more
concentrated and powerful as a source and be measured at higher levels at
residences to the effect of being non compliant with the Noise
Regulations.
130. At the hearing, the parties discussed the benefit of a masonry wall along
the boundary between Lot 300 and Lot 301. Mr Reynolds
noted in cross examination
that the 1dB sound reduction afforded by the construction of a 2 metre height
masonry wall was insignificant.
131. It appears to the Tribunal, that much store is placed by the Appellant on
operational practices to ensure that only 30 –
40 children will be allowed
outside at any one time, and the times at which they will be allowed to use the
outdoor play areas. Pointedly,
Mr Jones, in his evidence, was only prepared to
accept a condition of approval precluding outdoor play before 7am.
132. The Tribunal acknowledges the information as to the Appellant’s
management practices provided in evidence by the Appellant,
but notes that such
practices are not binding, and if approval were granted, a condition as to
numbers and time would have to be
imposed. The Tribunal is mindful not to impose
conditions which are either difficult to abide by or difficult to police.
Noise Modelling: Car Park
133. The proposed location of the 29 bay car park is along the western boundary
of Lot 300. The car park is to be used by staff,
and also by parents dropping
and picking up their children from the childcare centre. The car park will
therefore be used for a longer
period each day than the stated opening times.
There would therefore be the sound of car motors turning off and on, car doors
and closing, the sounds of parents and children talking, and on
occasions, the sound of children screaming or crying.
134. It should also be noted that Mr Reynolds’ report was based on the
day-time criteria of the Noise Regulations. If the centre
opened prior to 7am,
use of the car park would not comply with the Noise
Regulations.
135. Much of the argument at the hearing was focused on compliance or otherwise
with the Noise Regulations. The Noise Regulations
set a standard of noise
acceptable to a separate legislative regime, that is, the
Environmental
Protection Act 1986
136. However, this is only one way of testing whether the noise generated from
the site is acceptable. It is also necessary to determine
(notwithstanding compliance with the Noise Regulations) whether the type,
volume, time and duration of the noise conforms
to the amenity of the
137. It is the Tribunal’s view, in this regard, that the likely duration
of the noise of the children in the play areas, and
in particular, the number
and likely timing of the car movements on the site constitutes a significant
impact on the residential
amenity of the surrounding residents, and for this
reason, the appeal should be dismissed.
Child Numbers
138. The Appellant argued that a centre for 99 children should be approved
because the area of the subject land, the facilities to
be provided and the
manner in which the centre would be operated would result in no adverse effect
on the amenity of the neighbours.
139. The Appellant, through Mr Jones, also noted that while the proposed
development would be licensed for 99 children, it was the
Appellant’s
experience that the number of children rarely got beyond about 80 in any one day
because of illness and a range
of family situations.
140. There is no dispute that the subject land could physically accommodate 99
children in accordance with the Child Care Regulations.
141. This is not a simple refurbishment of the existing use. The two existing
buildings will be demolished. In their place will
be a new building of
, including the verandahs, which is 20% larger in floor area
than previously. The modern and efficient building will facilitate the
intense use of the space available. The number of children would increase from
37 to 99 and would include for the first time
the after school care of children.
142. Mr Devenish, for the Respondent, referred in his evidence, to the adverse
impact on amenity of the proposal because of the numbers
of children, the
associated parking movements, the layout of the centre with play areas adjacent
to residences and the proposed extended
operating hours which are anticipated to
have a detrimental affect on the surrounding residential area.
143. We are of the view that increasing the number of children by two and a half
times, widening the age range cared for, the associated
increase in traffic
movements, or “turnover” of children during the day, and the
resultant change in the amenity of the
locality is an intensification of the use
that warrants deliberation on whether or not it can be supported on its merits.
Put another
way has the intensification passed the threshold where it cannot be
supported. This is a question of fact and degree.
144. The neighbouring houses have an established level of residential amenity.
From the examination made of the impact of the proposed
development, it was
concluded that the intensification would compound the adverse impacts the use
has on the amenity of the neighbours.
This is the result of the potential
increase in noise and disturbance from additional traffic movements and hours of
145. The Respondent has in place a policy, properly formulated, that provides a
guide to the acceptable limits on the number of children
in a residential zone
in its locality. We do not consider that TP-C4 should be set aside unless it is
clearly established that the
intensification proposed will not result in the
impact on the neighbourhood that the it was introduced to control. We do not
that a case has been made to set aside TP-C4 in this instance.
146. We have therefore concluded that the increase in the number of children to
be accommodated on the subject land as a result of
the proposal will result in
an intensification of use the impact of which cannot be
147. For the foregoing reasons, the appeal is dismissed.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (161 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter