URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WAIRC/2025/379.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:04:20
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Western Australian Municipal, Administrative, Clerical and Services Union of Employees -v- City of Melville and others [2025] WAIRC 379; (23 June 2025)
APPLICATION PURSUANT TO SECTION
80BH TO NAME WESTERN AUSTRALIAN MUNICIPAL, ADMINISTRATIVE, CLERICAL AND SERVICES
UNION OF EMPLOYEES
AS A PARTY TO THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRY AWARD
WESTERN AUSTRALIAN INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COMMISSION
SENIOR COMMISSIONER R
TUESDAY, 13 MAY 2025
DELIVERED :
23 JUNE 2025
APPL 164 OF
WESTERN AUSTRALIAN MUNICIPAL,
ADMINISTRATIVE, CLERICAL AND SERVICES UNION OF EMPLOYEES
CITY OF MELVILLE AND OTHERS AS
REFERRED TO IN THE ATTACHED SCHEDULE
Respondents
MINISTER FOR INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS
Industrial Relations Act 1979
(WA) - New State instruments -
Construction of
- Effect of
in relation to the Local
Government Industry Award 2020 - Whether the new State instrument exists as a
single multi-employer collective
instrument for all declared employers or
whether multiple individual new State instruments exists for each declared
employer - Preliminary
issue determined
Legislation
Fair Work Act 2009
Industrial Relations Act 1979
Industrial Relations (General) Regulations 1997
Interpretation Act 1984
Preliminary Issue Determined
Representation:
Mr C Fogliani (of counsel) on behalf of the Western Australian Municipal,
Administrative, Clerical and Services Union of Employees
Ms J Flinn (of counsel) on behalf of the Shire of Dundas
Ms D Lamb (of counsel) on behalf of the Shire of East Pilbara
Ms R Panetta (of counsel) on behalf of the Minster for Industrial
Case(s) referred to in reasons:
City of Cockburn v Western Australia Municipal,
Administrative, Clerical and Services Union of Employees & Ors
[2023] WAIRC 00787
(2023) 103 WAIG 1723
East End Dwellings Co Ltd v Finsbury Borough Council
East West Airlines Ltd v Turner
[2010] NSWCA 53
Project Blue Sky Inc & Ors v Australian Broadcasting Authority
[1998] HCA 28
(1998) 194 CLR 355
Re Ludeke; Ex parte Customs Officers Association of Australia, Fourth
[1985] HCA 31
(1985) 155 CLR 513
SZTZAL v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
(2017) 262 CLR 362
Australian Rail, Tram and Bus Industry Union of
Employees, Western Australian Branch v Western Australian Government Railways
(2000) 80 WAIG 1740
Valuer-General of New South Wales v In Adam Pty Ltd
(2012) 211 LGERA 75
Western Australian Municipal, Administrative, Clerical and Services
Union of Employees v City of Bunbury & Ors
[2024] WAIRC 00443
Western Australian Municipal, Administrative, Clerical and Services
Union of Employees v City of Gosnells & Ors
[2024] WAIRC 00422
Western Australian Municipal, Administrative, Clerical and Services
Union of Employees v Shire of Northampton
[2024] WAIRC 00459
Western Australian Municipal, Administrative, Clerical and Services
Union of Employees v City of Swan & Ors
[2024] WAIRC 00463
Wyloo Metals Pty Ltd v Quarry Park Pty Ltd
[2024] WASCA 38
Reasons for Decision
Western Australian Municipal, Administrative, Clerical and Services Union of
Employees (
) has applied under
Industrial Relations
) for an order naming WASU as a party to a new
State instrument. The new State instrument referred to in WASU’s
application
is ‘the Local Government Industry Award 2020 Industrial
Agreement’. WASU listed some sixty local governments as respondents
application.
question which has arisen and which I am presently deciding as a preliminary
issue is whether, in respect of the
Local Government Industry Award 2020
), what was created by the operation of s 80BB(2) and (3) of the IR
Act, is a single new State instrument applying collectively to
all relevant
local governments or whether there is a separate new State instrument in respect
of each relevant individual local government.
there is a separate new State instrument in respect of each relevant individual
local government then WASU’s application
is misconceived and cannot
proceed in its current form as an application in respect of one new State
instrument.
preliminary issue turns on the correct construction of s 80BB of the IR Act
concerning new State instruments.
Local government change from Federal to State system
application follows the local government transition from the federal to the
State industrial relations system. I will
borrow from the Full Bench’s
decision in
City of Cockburn v Western Australia Municipal,
Administrative, Clerical and Services Union of Employees & Ors
[2023] WAIRC 00787
(2023) 103 WAIG 1723
[1] - [3] (
for a description of the transition:
On 1 January 2023, the local government industry transitioned from
the national industrial relations system to the State industrial
system, as a consequence of the
Industrial Relations Legislation Amendment
Fair Work Amendment (Transitional Arrangements –
Western Australian Local Government Employers and Employees) Regulations 2022
(Cth) and the
Fair Work (State Declarations – Employers not to be
national system employers) Endorsement 2022 No.1)
(Cth). Additionally,
complementary State Regulations, in Part 4 of the
Industrial Relations
Regulations (Consequential Amendment) Regulations 2022
(WA), amended the
Industrial Relations (General) Regulations 1997
(WA) to declare, for the
purposes of
Industrial Relations Act 1979
local government employers are not to be national system employers under
Fair Work Act 2009
The effect of the new
, in particular s 80BB, is to
create an industrial instrument, known as a ‘new State instrument’,
where immediately prior
to the commencement day, an instrument made under
, applied to ‘a declared employer and a declared
employee’. The latter are employers and employees in local government,
subject to the above transitional instruments.
Upon commencement of the legislation, an award or enterprise agreement made
became, under s 80BB(2), an ‘industrial
agreement’, described as a new State instrument and ‘applied’
declared employer and employees. Section 80BB is in the following
80BB. New State instruments
(1) This section applies —
(a) to the extent section 80BA does not provide for a declared employee
of a declared employer; and
(b) if, immediately before the relevant day, a federal industrial instrument
old federal instrument
) applies to, or purports to apply
to, the declared employee.
(2) On the relevant day, an industrial agreement (the
) applies to the declared employer and declared employees.
(3) The new State instrument is taken —
(a) to have been registered under this Act on the relevant day; and
(b) except as provided in this section or section 80BC, to have the same
terms as the old federal instrument including those terms
as added to or
modified by any of the following —
(i) terms of a federal award incorporated by the old federal instrument;
(ii) orders of a federal industrial authority;
(iii) another instrument under the national fair work legislation or the
repealed Workplace Act;
(c) to have a nominal expiry date that is the earlier of the
following —
(i) a day that is 2 years after the relevant day;
(ii) the day that, immediately before the relevant day, was the nominal
expiry day of the old federal instrument.
(4) This Act applies in relation to the new State instrument subject to any
modifications or exclusions prescribed by regulations
for this subsection.
(5) The new State instrument applies except as provided in the MCE Act.
LGIA is a modern award made under the
Fair Work Act 2009
). In accordance with
of the FWA and clause 4 of the
LGIA, it covers employers throughout Australia in the local government industry
and their employees
in the classifications set out in the LGIA.
the FWA, a person may be covered by a modern award, but the modern award does
not impose obligations or confer entitlements
unless the modern award also
applies to the person:
A modern award applies to an employer when it
meets the conditions in
of the FWA. The effect of that section is that
where an enterprise agreement is in operation in respect of an employer and
the modern award ceases to apply.
is uncontentious that as part of the local government transition to the State
system, the LGIA as a modern award under the FWA,
ceased to apply to any Western
Australian local governments and their employees. It is also uncontentious that
the terms of the LGIA
as at 1 January 2023 continued to apply to those
employers and employees to whom it had applied immediately before 1 January
pursuant to s 80BB of the IR Act.
New State instruments
under Part 2AA of the IR Act
80BB, which is reproduced at paragraph 5 above, is located within Part 2AA of
the IR Act. Part 2AA is headed ‘Employers
declared not to be national
system employers’. As extensive reference is made to the provisions of
Part 2AA in these reasons,
the entire part is reproduced as
these reasons for ease of reference.
Parties’ positions on
the preliminary issue
position is that, as it concerns the LGIA as a federal instrument, s 80BB
creates one new State instrument temporarily
applying collectively to Western
Australian local governments to whom the LGIA applied, or purported to apply,
immediately before
1 January 2023. WASU calls this instrument ‘the Local
Government Industry Award 2020 Industrial Agreement’.
Shire of Dundas’ position is that s 80BB results in each individual
declared employer who has declared employees to whom
the LGIA applied
immediately prior to 1 January 2023 having their own industrial agreement by way
of a new State instrument with
the same terms as the LGIA. That is, there exists
multiple single employer new State instruments each of which has the same terms
as the LGIA.
majority of the other local government respondents adopted the same position as
the Shire of Dundas in this regard. To streamline
the determination of the
preliminary issue, only the Shire of Dundas and the Shire of East Pilbara
(together referred to as
) made submissions and took part in the
hearing of the preliminary issue.
handful of the respondents have not responded to or taken part in the
proceedings or adopted a position in relation to the preliminary
Application by the Minister to intervene
Honourable Minister for Industrial Relations gave notice of her intention, by
the leave of the Commission, to intervene on behalf
of the State in relation to
the preliminary issue pursuant to s 30 of the IR Act.
Minister’s application was unopposed.
the hearing of the preliminary issue, I granted the Minister leave to intervene
insofar as it relates to the determination of the
preliminary issue. These are
my reasons for doing so.
Minister’s application for leave to intervene was made on the ground that
the State has an interest in the proper construction
of s 80BB(2) of the IR Act
in the context of the matter before the Commission. Counsel for the Minister
noted that in
at [13], the Full
Bench of the Commission accepted that the Minister’s interest in the
proper construction and application of
a section of the IR Act is an adequate
interest for the purposes of an intervention application.
Minister filed written submissions on the preliminary issue prior to the hearing
and pointed out that these proposed submissions
were not merely repetitive of
submissions made by the other parties. Therefore, granting the Minister leave to
intervene would have
some utility.
30 of the IR Act says:
(1) The Minister may, by giving the
Registrar notice in writing of the Minister’s intention to do so, and by
leave of the Commission,
intervene on behalf of the State in any proceedings
before the Commission in which the state has
(emphasis added)
30 has been contrasted with the Commission’s power under s 27(1)(k)
enabling the Commission to permit intervention by
a person who has, in the
opinion of the Commission,
in a matter.
30 appears to create a lower threshold for leave when it concerns the State. It
may be that the test of a sufficient interest
as articulated in
Ex parte Customs Officers Association of Australia, Fourth Division
[1985] HCA 31
(1985) 155 CLR 513
is not intended to apply for the
purpose of s 30 of the IR Act.
with the observations of the Full Bench in
, it is clear that the State has an interest in the
construction and application of the IR Act and accordingly leave should be
for the Minister to exercise her right under s 30 of the IR Act to
intervene on behalf of the State.
WASU’s submissions
for WASU pointed out that the present issue is novel. It is unique to the
circumstances of the change from the federal to
State system and unique to the
particular type of federal industrial instrument concerned. For the vast
majority of federal industrial
instruments that have transitioned to the State
system under Part 2AA of the IR Act, being enterprise agreements, the issue does
not arise. That is because an enterprise agreement self-evidently applies only
to a single enterprise.
is clear enough that the nature of the instrument created as a new State
instrument under Part 2AA is to be treated as if it were
an industrial agreement
under the IR Act rather than an award. However, the reality is that the LGIA is
neither the product of a
bargain between an employer and a union or collective
of employees, nor is it an instrument that applies at an enterprise level.
therefore ill-suited to be treated as an industrial agreement under the IR Act.
noted that s 80BB(4) makes it clear that the whole of the IR Act was intended to
operate without modification in relation to
new State instruments. There are no
regulations prescribed for the purposes of s 80BB(4) creating exclusions in this
submits that what flows from this supports its construction of s 80BB. Part of
the scheme of the IR Act is that an industrial
agreement cannot exist without
there being two or more parties to it. WASU refers in this regard to the Full
Bench’s decision
Australian Rail, Tram and Bus
Industry Union of Employees, Western Australian Branch v Western Australian
Government Railways Commission
(2000) 80 WAIG 1740
In the Western Australian Industrial Gazette dated 22
1999 (79 WAIG 3708)
, the Registrar published the appropriate Notice of
Retirement by the abovenamed organisation dated 12 November 1999.
As a result, by the operation of s 41(6) and (7) of the Act, the applicant
organisation retired from the Agreement, ceasing to be
a party to the Agreement.
The Agreement could, therefore, continue in force in respect of only one party
thereto. Such a proposition
is, however, absurd.
It is trite to say that an agreement cannot exist or continue, unless two or
more parties have and remain bound by an agreement. In
this case, the applicant,
since there were only two parties to the Agreement, by exercising a statutory
right to retire, exercised
coincidentally a right to terminate the Agreement by
the retirement, as and from the date specified in the Notice of Retirement.
to WASU, this means that the LGIA must become a new State instrument with
multiple local government parties in order for
it to exist. There is no union or
employee association party to the LGIA. A new State instrument with only a
single local government
employer as party to it cannot exist as an industrial
agreement under the IR Act.
counsel acknowledged that the concept of having an industrial agreement without
a union party is also an anomaly which
is inconsistent with the scheme of the IR
Act. However, this anomaly was contemplated by the legislature and dealt with by
s 80BH which enables an organisation of employees or an association of
employees to apply for an order naming the organisation or
association as a
party to a new State instrument.
short, WASU submits that its construction of s 80BB sits more harmoniously with
the IR Act’s scheme, because it means that
the LGIA became a new State
instrument with two or more parties consistent with the nature of industrial
agreements under the IR
second main theme of WASU’s submissions draws support for its conclusion
based on s 80BB(3)(b) read with the coverage clause
4.1 of the LGIA. By s
80BB(3)(b), a new State instrument is taken to have the same terms as the old
federal instrument. The LGIA,
being the relevant old federal instrument, says at
This industry award covers
employers throughout Australia in the local government industry and their
employees in the classifications
listed in Schedule A —
Classification Definitions to the exclusion of any other modern award.
says that the fact the new State instrument’s terms are taken to include
clause 4.1, means its terms are such that all
employers in the local government
industry are ‘covered’ by it, and therefore are parties to it. WASU
says the Shires’
alternative construction of s 80BB, cannot be reconciled
with cl 4.1 because cl 4.1 does not expressly refer to a single individual
employer. There cannot be both a new State instrument that applies only to the
Shire of Dundas, and that new State instrument have
a term that says it covers
all employers in the local government industry.
submits that the Shires’ construction would require a rewrite of cl 4.1,
which would conflict with s 80BB(3)(b)’s
requirement to take the new State
instrument as having the same terms as the LGIA.
WASU makes the point that if the effect of s 80BB was to transform the single
LGIA into numerous new State instruments, this
is conceptually inconsistent with
the purpose of s 80BB which is to uphold the continuity of the pre-existing
industrial and employment
arrangements, by splitting one instrument into
multiple instruments. This purpose is expressed in the
Explanatory
Industrial Relations Legislation Amendment Bill 2021
[T]o provide declared employers and declared employees with
continuity in their employment arrangements for an appropriate transitional
period, to enable them to comply with the IR Act and other applicable state
industrial laws.
WASU relies on the fact that only a single new State instrument containing the
terms of the LGIA is maintained on the website
www.wairc.wa.gov.au
rather than 60 or so versions for each individual local government.
The Shires’ and Intervenor’s submissions
Shire of Dundas submitted that the words used in Part 2AA support a construction
that a separate new State instrument is created
for each individual local
government that applied the LGIA immediately prior to the local government
transition. It refers to the
consistent use of the term ‘declared
employer’ in the singular throughout the sections in Part 2AA. The Shire
out that in contrast, Part 2AA refers to the defined term ‘declared
employee’ in both the singular and the plural.
Shire of Dundas submits that it is individual local governments or employers
that are referred to in the
Industrial Relations (General)
Regulations
(WA) referenced in s 80A(2)(a). It is clearly contemplated by
s 80A(2)(a) that individual employers are the subject of the declaration
made by the
Regulations
rather than a category or cohort of employers or
an industry generally.
Shire of Dundas submitted that its construction is consistent with the objects
of the IR Act and in particular the objects in
s 6 which focus on the promotion
of collective bargaining at the enterprise level to reach agreements that are
appropriate to the
needs of enterprises within each industry. A construction of
s 80BB that makes the LGIA a new State instrument operating at a single
enterprise level rather than a collective or industry level has greater
alignment with these objects.
Shire of Dundas also relies on the broader legislative context in support of its
contended for construction. It points out that
s 80A(1) expressly makes
reference to s 14(2) of the FWA. Section 14(2) of the FWA says:
Particular employers declared not to be national system
(2) Despite subsection (1) and sections 30D and 30N, a particular employer is
not a national system employer if:
(a) that employer:
(i) is a body established for a public purpose by or under a law of a State
or Territory, by the Governor of a State, by the Administrator
of a Territory or
by a Minister of a State or Territory; or
(ii) is a body established for a local government purpose by or under a law
of a State or Territory; or
(iii) is a wholly-owned subsidiary (within the meaning of the
Corporations
) of, or is wholly controlled by, an employer to which subparagraph
(ii) applies; and
(b) that employer is specifically declared, by or under a law of the State or
Territory, not to be a national system employer for
the purposes of this Act;
(c) an endorsement by the Minister under paragraph (4)(a) is in force in
relation to the employer.
also refers to ‘employer’ in the singular contemplating
individual named employers as being the subject of an endorsement
federal Minister.
Shire of Dundas says its construction is consistent with the purpose of s 80BB
as stated in the Explanatory Memorandum, namely
to provide declared employers
and declared employees with continuity in their employment arrangements for a
transitional period,
to enable them to comply with the IR Act and other
applicable state industrial laws.
the Shire of Dundas argues that WASU’s contended for construction leads to
impracticable and unintended results in
practice such as:
in determining which employers are party to a single, multi-employer new State
instrument.
Uncertainty
in relation to the impact of a party’s retirement from a multi-employer
new State instrument for the ongoing operation
of the new State instrument
particularly if it is the union party that retires from it: s 41(7) of the IR
Difficulties
in dealing with applications to vary a multi-employer new State instrument, and
in particular variations designed to
meet the needs of an employer or employees
at an enterprise level: s 43 of the IR Act.
in the application of the provisions of s 41(8) the IR Act concerning the
replacement and cancellation of industrial agreements
by the making of a
subsequent agreement.
of the possibility of a union retiring from the new State instrument in respect
of a particular enterprise where union
members at that enterprise want the union
to retire from the agreement but in circumstances where union members in other
enterprises
do not want the union to retire from it.
there is a single multi-employer new State instrument, then any union that has
coverage of at least one employee across multiple
local government employers may
apply to be named as a party to it under s 80BH even if no employees at other
local governments are
eligible to be members of that union. The union would then
have standing to enforce the new State instrument in respect of a declared
government employer even if that local government employer has no employees who
are eligible for membership of that union.
Shire of East Pilbara’s submissions supplemented the Shire of
Dundas’ submissions. Its submissions emphasised the
difference in the
nature of a modern award such as the LGIA under the FWA and an industrial
agreement under the IR Act. It noted
that if parliament intended for the LGIA to
operate in a similar way to a federal award under the FWA it could have:
a) drafted the transitional provisions at Part 2AA to differentiate
between new State instruments which were enterprise agreements
and those which
were modern awards under the FWA or;
the LGIA an interim State award.
Parliament chose not to make any
distinction, but to instead have all old federal instruments operate in the same
way as new State
instruments.
Minister submits that Part 2AA must be construed in the broader legislative
context. In Part 2AA of the IR Act, s 80A provides
the mechanism under Western
Australian law for declaring an employer not to be a national system employer.
But s 80A refers to, and
relies on the operation of, s 14(2) of the FWA. The FWA
is therefore relevant legislative context.
14(2) of the FWA provides for three categories of employers that may be the
subject of a declaration:
established for a public purpose by or under a law of a State;
governments; and
Wholly-owned
subsidiaries of local governments.
indicated above, s 14(2) of the FWA enables ‘a particular employer’
to be declared not to be a national system employer
for the purposes of the FWA,
if that employer is specifically declared by or under a law of the State not to
be a national system
employer for the purposes of the FWA.
14(3) of the FWA provides that a declaration under s 14(2)(b) ‘does not
apply to an employer that is covered by a declaration
by or under such a law
only because it is included in a specified class or kind of
14(4)(a) of the FWA says the federal Minister may endorse, ‘in relation to
an employer’ a declaration referred
to in s 14(2)(b).
together, these provisions mean, in effect, that each particular employer who is
to be declared not a national system employer
must be specifically named.
Minister points out that under this scheme there may be different regulations
made at different times declaring an employer or
employers not to be a national
system employer for the purposes of the FWA and so there may be different
relevant days for each of
those declarations.
Regulations
was made under s 80A(2) of the IR Act declaring
employers not be national system employers for the purpose of the FWA. The
says that while currently reg 7 only declares a number of individual
local government employers not to be national system employers,
in theory a
regulation could also provide for other types of employers specified in s
14(2)(a) of the FWA not to be national system
employers for the purposes of the
this broader legislative context it is natural and unsurprising that Part 2AA
refers to ‘declared employer’ in
the singular. The legislative
scheme reveals an intention that a single named employer be a declared employer.
The scheme deliberately
does not permit for categories or classes of employers
to be declared employers.
Minister submits that this apparent intention defeats the application of the
rule in s 10(c) of the
Interpretation Act
whereby words in the singular number include the plural.
the Shires, the Minister points to other provisions in the IR Act concerning
industrial agreements which she says are consistent
with the concept that a new
State instrument, which is taken to be an industrial agreement, has a single
named employer as party
to it. Sections 41, 80BC and 80BG of the IR Act are each
referred to.
the Minister notes that s 80BB is a deeming provision. It deems the existence of
an industrial agreement and thereby creates
a statutory fiction because a
federally registered enterprise agreement or a federal award is not in fact an
industrial agreement
under the IR Act, except for the deeming provision.
s 80BB is a deeming provision, some modification of the terms of the LGIA is
acceptable and not, as WASU argues, indicative
of an intention that the new
State instrument be a multi-employer instrument. The Minister refers to
East West Airlines Ltd v Turner
[2010] NSWCA 53
(2010) 78 NSWLR 1
) at [52] in which Justice Hoeben referring to a statement
of Lord Asquith in
East End Dwellings Co Ltd v Finsbury Borough
[1952] AC 109
at 132 said:
[I]f you were bidden to
treat an imaginary state of affairs as real, you must surely, unless prohibited
from doing so, also imagine
as real the consequences and incidents which, if the
putative state of affairs had in fact existed, must inevitably have flowed from
or accompanied it.
In other words, when confronted with a fiction imposed by a statute, the
court or tribunal has to determine its incidents. See also:
Valuer-General
of New South Wales v In Adam Pty Ltd
[2012] NSWCA 20
(2012) 211 LGERA
the fact that a new State instrument might not in fact have at least two parties
does not advance WASU’s construction
either. The principle in
means that the new State instrument is to be treated as
having at least two parties, even if it in fact does not. It is to be treated
a valid industrial agreement.
Principles of statutory construction
primary object of statutory construction is to construe the relevant provision
so that it is consistent with the language and
purpose of all the provisions of
the statute:
Project Blue Sky Inc & Ors v Australian Broadcasting
[1998] HCA 28
(1998) 194 CLR 355
principles were recently summarised by the Court of Appeal in
Wyloo Metals
Pty Ltd v Quarry Park Pty Ltd
[2024] WASCA 38
The context includes the legislative history and extrinsic
At common law, apart from any reliance upon
Interpretation Act
(WA), a court may have regard to reports of law reform bodies to
ascertain the mischief which a statutory provision is intended to
However, legislative history and extrinsic materials cannot displace the
meaning of statutory text. Further, the examination of legislative
history and
extrinsic materials is not an end in itself.
The purpose of legislation must be derived from the statutory text and not
from any assumption about the desired or desirable reach
or operation of the
relevant provisions. The intended reach of a legislative provision is to be
discerned from the words of the provision
and not by making an a priori
assumption about its purpose.
Recently, in
ENT19 v Minister for Home Affairs
Edelman, Steward and Gleeson JJ made these observations:
The context of the words, consideration of the consequences of adopting a
provision's literal meaning, the purpose of the statute
and principles of
construction may lead a court to adopt a construction that departs from the
literal meaning of the words of a provision.
One such principle is that
legislation must be construed on the prima facie basis that its provisions are
intended to give effect
to harmonious goals. As expressed by Gageler J in
SAS Trustee Corporation v Miles
'statutory text must be
considered from the outset in context and attribution of meaning to the text in
context must be guided so
far as possible by statutory purpose on the
understanding that a legislature ordinarily intends to pursue its purposes by
means'. Where conflict appears to arise in construing an Act, 'the
conflict must be alleviated, so far as possible, by adjusting
the meaning of the
competing provisions to achieve that result which will best give effect to the
purpose and language of those provisions
while maintaining the unity of all the
statutory provisions', and this 'will often require the court "to determine
which is the leading
provision and which the subordinate provision, and which
must give way to the other"'. Ultimately, the task in applying the accepted
principles of statutory construction is to discern what Parliament is to be
taken to have intended.
Interpretation Act
provides that, in the
interpretation of a provision of a written law (defined in
as 'all Acts for
the time being in force'), a construction that would promote the purpose or
object underlying the written law (whether
that purpose or object is expressly
stated in the written law or not) shall be preferred to a construction that
would not promote
that purpose or object. The requirement in
construction be preferred to another can apply only where two constructions are
otherwise open. If the ordinary meaning
conveyed by the text of a provision is
to be modified by reference to the purposes or objects underlying the written
law, the modification
must be able to be identified precisely as that which is
necessary to give effect to those purposes or objects and it must be consistent
with the text otherwise adopted by the draftsperson.
requires a court
to construe a written law, and not rewrite it by reference to its purposes or
The function of a definition in a statute is not, except in rare cases, to
enact substantive law. Rather, its function is to provide
aid in construing the
substantive enactment that contains the defined term. The meaning of the
definition depends on the context,
and the purpose or object, of the substantive
principles mean that context should be considered at the first stage and in its
widest sense:
SZTZAL v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
[2017] HCA 34
(2017) 262 CLR 362
Context may encompass
the structure of the Act and surrounding provisions.
Consideration
80BB clearly expresses that a new State instrument that applies to the declared
employer and declared employees is ‘an
industrial agreement’. The
section’s purpose is to give an old federal instrument status as an
industrial instrument
under the Act. Therefore, the key to resolving the current
construction issue involves finding the way that the new State instrument
most harmoniously operate as an industrial instrument within the scheme of the
has identified one way that a single employer new State instrument could be seen
as disharmonious with the IR Act’s scheme
for industrial agreements,
namely, by having an insufficient number of parties, contrary to the statement
of the Full Bench in
agreements under the IR Act are made pursuant s 41. It says:
agreement with respect to any industrial matter or for the prevention or
resolution under this Act of any related disputes,
disagreements, or questions
may be made between an organisation or association of employees and any employer
or organisation or association
of employers.
(1a) An agreement may apply to a single enterprise or more than a single
enterprise.
(1b) For the purposes of subsection (1a) an agreement applies to more than a
single enterprise if it applies to —
(a) more than one business, project or undertaking; or
(b) the activities carried on by more than one public authority.
(2) Subject to subsection (3) and sections 41A and 49N, where the parties to
an agreement referred to in subsection (1) apply to the
Commission for
registration of the agreement as an industrial agreement the Commission must
register the agreement as an industrial
(3) Before registering an industrial agreement the Commission may require the
parties to effect such variation as the Commission considers
necessary or
desirable for the purpose of giving clear expression to the true intention of
the parties.
(4) An industrial agreement extends to and binds —
(a) all employees who are employed —
(i) in any calling mentioned in the industrial agreement in the industry or
industries to which the industrial agreement applies;
(ii) by an employer who is —
(I) a party to the industrial agreement; or
(II) a member of an organisation of employers that is a party to the
industrial agreement or that is a member of an association of
employers that is
a party to the industrial agreement;
(b) all employers referred to in paragraph (a)(ii), and no other employee or
employer, and its scope must be expressly so limited
in the industrial
(5) An industrial agreement operates —
(a) in the area specified in the agreement; and
(b) for the term specified in the agreement.
(6) Notwithstanding the expiry of the term of an industrial agreement, it
continues in force in respect of all parties to the agreement,
except those who
retire from the agreement, until a new agreement or an award in substitution for
the first-mentioned agreement has
(7) At any time after, or not more than 30 days before, the expiry of an
industrial agreement any party to the agreement may file
in the office of the
Registrar a notice in the approved form signifying the party’s intention
to retire from the agreement
at the expiration of 30 days from the date of the
filing, and, on the expiration of that period, the party ceases to be a party to
the agreement.
(8) When a new industrial agreement is made and
registered, or an award or enterprise order is made, in substitution for an
agreement (the first agreement), the first agreement is taken to be
cancelled, except to the extent that the new industrial agreement,
order saves the provisions of the first agreement.
(9) To the extent that an industrial agreement is contrary to or inconsistent
with an award, the industrial agreement prevails unless
the agreement expressly
provides otherwise.
reality that an old federal instrument may not have parties as required by s 41
is not unique to federal modern awards. Federal
enterprise agreements can also
be made without naming an employee organisation as party. WASU has not suggested
that an enterprise
agreement that does not have two or more parties cannot exist
as a new State instrument. Rather, WASU appears to have accepted that
instruments can exist as new State instruments, as it applied under s 80BH
to be named as a party to several of them. See for
Australian Municipal, Administrative, Clerical and Services Union of Employees v
City of Gosnells & Ors
[2024] WAIRC 00422
Western Australian
Municipal, Administrative, Clerical and Services Union of Employees v Shire of
Northampton
[2024] WAIRC 00459
Western Australian Municipal,
Administrative, Clerical and Services Union of Employees v City of Swan &
[2024] WAIRC 00463
Western Australian Municipal,
Administrative, Clerical and Services Union of Employees v City of Bunbury &
[2024] WAIRC 00443.
reality is reflected in the words used in Part 2AA and s 80BB in particular.
Section 80BB is expressed in terms of a new State
‘applying’ to a declared employer and declared employees. It does
not refer to the declared employer being
a ‘party’ to a new State
instrument. Section 80BC provides for ‘a declared employer, a declared
employee or an
organisation’ to apply to amend a new State instrument. It
does not refer to a ‘party’ being able to apply to amend
a new State
instrument. Indeed, nowhere in Part 2AA is there any description of an employer
by reference to being a ‘party’
to a new State instrument.
of the reasons that parliament may have chosen to express new State instruments
to declared employers, rather than specifying that declared
employers are a
to new State instruments, may be to disqualify a
declared employer from exercising the right of a party to retire from a new
instrument under s 41(7) of the IR Act, on the basis that to do so would
be contrary to Part 2AA’s purpose of providing continuity
in terms and
conditions of employment.
80BH permits an organisation of employees or an association of employees to
apply for an order ‘naming’ it as
‘a party’ to a new
State instrument. There is no provision in Part 2AA for a declared employer to
apply to be named as
a party to a new State instrument. Because s 80BB(2) says
that the new State instrument
to the declared employer, and
s 80BC permits ‘a declared employer, a declared employee or an
organisation’ to apply to
amend a new State instrument, there is
practically no need for an employer to be named as a party to a new State
instrument. An industrial
agreement can be enforced under, by and against
‘an employer bound by it’: s 83(1)d) of the IR Act. It is not
that the employer be a named party to the new State instrument for it
to operate.
80BH does not mandate that an organisation of employees or association of
employees must apply for an order to be named a
party to a new State instrument.
Any such application is optional and voluntary. If no application is made, the
new State instrument
remains operative.
this light, s 80BH cannot be characterised as being intended to cure the anomaly
that a new State instrument does not have a union
party, as required by s 41 of
the IR Act. Rather, it would appear that s 80BH’s purpose is to enable a
union to acquire the
status of a party for the purpose of enforcement, if the
new State instrument applies to employees who are eligible for membership
union and the union wants to acquire that status.
Accordingly,
the disharmony, or anomaly, of a new State instrument existing without two or
more parties is not, in my view, a compelling
indication of either s
80BH’s purpose or the preferable construction of s 80BB. If anything, it
is a core feature of old federal
instruments which s 80BB’s deeming effect
operates on.
any event, this disharmony is outweighed by the greater disharmony created by
WASU’s contended for construction. For instance,
section 41(8)
When a new industrial agreement is made and registered, or an
award or enterprise order is made, in substitution for an industrial
first agreement
), the first agreement is taken to be
cancelled, except to the extent that the new industrial agreement, award or
order saves the
provisions of the first agreement.
the LGIA became a collective, multi-employer new State instrument, and a new
industrial agreement is made in respect of one local
government pursuant to s 41
of the IR Act, the registration of the new industrial agreement would be taken
to cancel the new State
instrument, even though the new industrial agreement
relates only to one local government and its employees.
concept of a collective, multi-employer new State instrument is disharmonious
with the ability in s 80BC for ‘a declared
employer, a declared employee
or an organisation’ to apply to amend a new State instrument, and for such
amendments to be made
if the Commission is satisfied ‘it is fair and
reasonable to do so in the circumstances’. It is difficult to envisage
the Commission could ever be satisfied as to the fairness and reasonableness of
a proposed amendment, without hearing from or
considering the position of every
employer and employee to whom the new State instrument applied. The difficulty
of meeting the test
means such applications would be rare, and success rarer.
This is in a context where new State instruments are a form of transitional
instrument applying temporarily. It is unlikely the parliament intended to
include a mechanism for amendment of new State instruments,
with temporary
application, for the mechanism to be practically prohibitive.
practical consequence of adopting WASU’s contended for construction is
that it would be very difficult to identify precisely
which employers (and
therefore which employees) the new State instrument applies to. There are 137
local governments (and 8 regional
local governments) that are declared employers
listed in Schedule 4 of the
Regulations
. WASU have named some 60 local
governments as respondents to these proceedings, implicitly accepting that the
LGIA did not apply
to all 137 local governments immediately prior to 1 January
2023. But there is nothing in the IR Act or the
Regulations
which gives
any clue as to which of the 137 local governments the LGIA applied to prior to 1
January 2023.
If s 80BB creates a single, multi-employer new State instrument, but
ascertaining who it applies to is difficult, it follows that
it will also be
difficult to implement many of the IR Act’s provisions that apply to
industrial agreements.
examples of disharmony created by the concept of a collective, multi-employer
new State instrument were identified by the Shire
of Dundas and the Minister, as
set out above.
broader legislative context supports the view that s 80BB of the IR Act creates
separate new State instruments for each individual
declared employer. Section
80A expressly refers to s 14(2) of the FW Act. Also, the heading to Part
2AA is in language that replicates
precisely the language used in s 14 about
employers being declared not to be national system employers. Part 2AA can only
in conjunction with s 14 of the FWA.
14(2) of the FWA refers to ‘a particular employer’ as not being a
national system employer when that employer
meets the criteria in s 14(2). It is
clear for the reasons articulated by the Shire of Dundas and the Minister, that
the subject
of s 14(2) is an individual, named employer. A ‘declared
employer’ is, necessarily, also an individual named employer.
the Minister’s counsel identified, s 14(3) of the FWA precludes a
declaration having effect in respect to an employer only
because the employer is
included in a specified class or kind of employer. Also, it is theoretically
possible under s 80A of the
IR Act that different employers will be declared by
regulations not to be national system employers at different times and
additionally
or alternatively with different days fixed as being the
‘relevant day’ for the purpose of the declaration. Section 80BB
the IR Act provides for a new State instrument to be created ‘on the
relevant day’. This theoretical possibility demonstrates
why there must be
separate new State instruments.
legislative framework that supports the operation of Part 2AA treats declared
employers singularly and separately. New State instruments
being singular and
separate in respect of individual declared employers provides consistency with
this framework and harmony with
the sense in which the term ‘declared
employer’ is used in the statutory provisions.
construction is also consistent with the IR Act’s objects in sections
6(ad) and 6(ag):
[T]to promote collective bargaining and to
establish the primacy of collective agreements over individual agreements;
[T]o encourage employers, employees and organisations to reach agreements
appropriate to the needs of enterprises within industry
and the employees in
those enterprises.
WASU’s construction, the created new State instrument is unconnected to
individual enterprises and therefore has no function
in advancing enterprise
level collective bargaining. On the Shires’ construction, a new State
instrument exists for individual
enterprises and so plays a role in advancing
these objects because:
gives effect to the ability to initiate bargaining at an enterprise level as
contemplated by s 42 of the IR Act;
gives effect to the ability to vary, renew or cancel the new State instrument to
meet the needs of an enterprise by agreement under
s 43(1) of the IR
gives effect to the ability to vary the new State instrument to meet the needs
of an enterprise under s 43(2) of the IR Act.
am unpersuaded by WASU’s reliance on the coverage clause of the LGIA as
support for its construction. First, the LGIA is not
material of a kind that is
Interpretation Act
. In any event, the LGIA is
only one of many federal industrial instruments which are impacted by s 80BB of
the IR Act. The LGIA cannot,
in isolation, provide useful context to assist in
understanding the purpose of s 80BB. If resort is had to the LGIA as extrinsic
material, resort would also need to be had to every other federal instrument
which existed at the time s 80BB was enacted, to which
s 80BB might apply.
the words in cl 4.1, which WASU relies on, do not mean that the LGIA covers the
multiple local governments who are respondents
to WASU’s application.
Clause 4.1 of the LGIA cannot be read in isolation. Clause 2 of the LGIA defines
to mean a national system employer within the meaning of
the FWA. The respondents are no longer national system employers.
the coverage clause must be read and understood in the context of s 46 of the
FWA. Coverage is only one prerequisite for a
modern award applying to an
employer and its employees. It is not determinative of which employers are bound
by the LGIA.
coverage clause of the LGIA cannot sensibly be given meaning or effect as part
of a new State instrument, whether the new State
instrument is a separate new
State instrument for a single employer, or a single collective multi-employer
new State instrument.
It could be said that this sits uneasily with s
80BB’s demand that the new State instrument be taken to have the same
as the old federal instrument. However, it does not, as WASU submits,
impermissibly require the old federal instrument be rewritten.
Section 80BB of
the IR Act itself is the source of a new State instrument’s application
and binding effect.
do I place any weight on the manner in which the website displays the LGIA as an
industrial agreement. The
of the Registrar of the Western
Australian Industrial Relations Commission maintains a webpage of ‘current
industrial agreements’.
It displays the Local Government Industry Award
2020 as a new State instrument in force from 1 January 2023, on a single page,
a single hyperlink, accompanied by the usual disclaimer that the document
should be used as a guide only.
counsel did not articulate why the principles of statutory construction permit
resort to the Department’s website,
and in particular pages created after
the statute’s enactment, as an aid to the construction of s 80BB of the IR
Act. I decline
to have regard to this material.
Conclusion and orders
these reasons, I consider that on a correct construction a ‘new State
instrument’ referred to in s 80BB of the IR
Act is an instrument
which applies to an individual declared employer and not to a collective of
multiple declared employers.
Accordingly,
applying the correct construction of s 80BB, a separate new State
instrument is created for each individual local government
to whom the LGIA
applied, or purported to apply, immediately prior to the local government
transition.
consequence of this conclusion is that WASU’s application under s 80BH for
an order naming it as party to a single multi-employer
new State instrument
called the Local Government Industrial Award 2020 Industrial Agreement is
misconceived. No such new State instrument
exists and no such order can be
exercise the ability to apply for an order naming it as a party to a new State
instrument under s 80BH of the IR Act, WASU will
need to apply in respect of
each separate new State instrument created under s 80BB which has the terms of
will hear from the parties as to what orders should follow from this
determination.
Schedule 1 – Extract of
Industrial Relations Act 1979
— Employers declared not to be national
system employers
[Heading inserted: No. 30 of 2021
Division 1 — Declarations
[Heading inserted: No. 30 of 2021 s. 38.]
80A. Employers declared not to be national system employers
(1) This section applies to an employer who, under the FW Act section 14(2),
may be declared by or under a law of the State not to
be a national system
(2) The regulations may —
(a) declare the employer not to be a national system employer for the purposes
of the FW Act; and
(b) fix a day (the
relevant day
) for the purposes of that
declaration.
[Section 80A inserted: No. 30 of 2021 s.
Division 2 — Change from federal to State system
[Heading inserted: No. 30 of 2021 s. 38.]
80B. Terms used
In this Division —
declared employee
means a person employed by a declared
declared employer
means an employer declared not to be a
national system employer in regulations under
section 80A(2)(a);
federal award
(a) a modern award under the FW Act; or
(b) an award under the repealed Workplace Act continued in existence under
the FW (Transitional) Act;
federal industrial authority
(a) the Australian Industrial Relations Commission under the repealed
Workplace Act; or
(b) the FW Commission;
federal industrial instrument
means a fair work instrument
under the FW Act;
national fair work legislation
(a) the FW Act; or
(b) the FW (Transitional) Act;
new State instrument
has the meaning given in section
old federal instrument
has the meaning given in section
80BB(1)(b);
relevant day
has the meaning given in section 80A(2)(b);
repealed Workplace Act
Workplace Relations Act
(Commonwealth);
includes conditions, restrictions and other
provisions.
[Section 80B inserted: No. 30 of 2021
80BA. Operation of awards, industrial agreements or orders
(1) The regulations may provide that, on and from the relevant day, an award,
industrial agreement or order specified in the regulations
applies to the
employees of a declared employer specified in the regulations.
(2) If regulations are made under subsection (1), on and from the relevant
day the award, industrial agreement or order applies to
each of the following
(a) the declared employer;
(b) the declared employees of the declared employer;
(c) an organisation that is a party to the award or industrial agreement or
that is bound by the order.
80BB. New State instruments
(1) This section applies —
(a) to the extent section 80BA does not provide for a declared employee of a
declared employer; and
(b) if, immediately before the relevant day, a federal industrial instrument
old federal instrument
) applies to, or purports to apply to,
the declared employee.
(2) On the relevant day, an industrial agreement (the
) applies to the declared employer and declared employees.
The new State instrument is taken —
(a) to have been registered under this Act on the relevant day; and
(b) except as provided in this section or section 80BC, to have the same
terms as the old federal instrument including those terms
as added to or
modified by any of the following —
(i) terms of a federal award incorporated by the old federal instrument;
(ii) orders of a federal industrial authority;
(iii) another instrument under the national fair work legislation or the
repealed Workplace Act;
(c) to have a nominal expiry date that is the earlier of the
following —
(i) a day that is 2 years after the relevant day;
(ii) the day that, immediately before the relevant day, was the nominal
expiry day of the old federal instrument.
(1) This Act applies in relation to the new State instrument subject to any
modifications or exclusions prescribed by regulations
for this subsection.
(2) The new State instrument applies except as provided in the MCE Act.
[Section 80BB inserted: No. 30 of 2021 s. 38.]
80BC. Amendment of new State instruments
(1) A declared employer, a declared employee or an organisation may apply to
the Commission to amend a new State instrument.
(2) On the application, the Commission may make the amendment if it is
satisfied it is fair and reasonable to do so in the circumstances.
(3) The amendment may be provided to take effect —
(a) immediately; or
(b) progressively, in stages specified in the amendment.
[Section 80BC inserted: No. 30 of 2021 s. 38.]
80BD. Ability to carry over matters
The Commission may, in connection with the operation of this Part, or any
matter arising directly or indirectly out of the operation
of this Part
(a) accept, recognise, adopt or rely on any step taken under, or for, the
national fair work legislation; and
(b) accept or rely on anything (including in the nature of evidence presented
for the purpose of any proceedings) that has been presented,
filed or provided
under, or for, the national fair work legislation; and
(c) give effect in any other way to any other thing done under, or for, the
national fair work legislation.
[Section 80BD inserted: No. 30 of 2021 s. 38.]
80BE. References in new State instruments to federal industrial authority
and General Manager
(1) In this section —
General Manager
means the General Manager under the FW
(2) On and from the relevant day, a term of a new State instrument expressed
to confer a power or function on a federal industrial
authority has effect as if
it conferred the power or function on the Commission.
(3) On and from the relevant day, a term of a new State instrument expressed
to confer a power or function on the General Manager
has effect as if it
conferred the power or function on the Registrar.
[Section 80BE inserted: No. 30 of 2021 s. 38.]
80BF. References in new State instruments to provisions of Commonwealth
(1) In this section —
corresponding provision of this Act
, to a provision of the FW
Act, means —
(a) if paragraph (b) does not apply — a provision of this Act that is
of similar effect to the provision of the FW Act; or
(b) a provision of this Act declared by regulations to be a corresponding
(2) On and from the relevant day, a term of a new State instrument expressed
to refer to a provision of the FW Act is taken to refer
to the corresponding
provision of this Act.
[Section 80BF inserted: No. 30 of 2021 s. 38.]
80BG. References in new State instruments to federal organisations
(1) In this section —
federal counterpart
has the meaning given in the FW (Registered
Organisations) Act section 9A.
(2) On and from the relevant day, a term of a new State instrument expressed
to refer to a federal organisation is taken to refer
to an organisation under
this Act of which the federal organisation is a federal counterpart.
(3) If the federal organisation is not a federal counterpart of an
organisation under this Act, the federal organisation is taken
organisation under this Act representing the declared employees of the relevant
declared employer in proceedings or other
matters arising under this Act.
(4) Subsection (3) ceases to apply to the federal organisation when the new
State instrument ceases to apply to the relevant declared
employer and declared
[Section 80BG inserted: No. 30 of 2021 s. 38.]
80BH. Named parties to new State instruments
(1) An organisation of employees or an association of employees may apply to
the Commission to make an order naming the organisation
or association as a
party to a new State instrument.
(2) On the application, the Commission must grant the order if, in the
opinion of the Commission, the instrument applies to an employee
who is eligible
to be a member of the organisation or association.
[Section 80BH inserted: No. 30 of 2021 s. 38; amended: No. 43
of 2024 s. 56.]
80BI. Employment under old federal instrument
(1) Subsection (2) applies in relation to deciding the entitlements of a
declared employee under a new State instrument.
(2) Employment of the declared employee with a declared employer before the
relevant day that counted under the old federal instrument
also counts as
employment of the declared employee with the declared employer under the new
State instrument.
(3) If, before the relevant day, the declared employee has already had the
benefit of an entitlement determined by reference to a
period of service, the
period of service cannot be counted again under subsection (2) for calculating
the declared employee’s
entitlements of that type under the new State
instrument.
[Section 80BI inserted: No. 30 of 2021 s. 38.]
80BJ. Leave accrued immediately before relevant day
(1) This section applies to any paid or unpaid leave accrued under an old
federal instrument, the national fair work legislation or
a law of this
(2) Leave accrued immediately before the relevant day by a declared employee
to whom a new State instrument applies is taken to have
accrued under the new
State instrument.
[Section 80BJ inserted: No. 30 of 2021 s. 38.]
80BK. Leave taken under old federal instrument
(1) A declared employee who was, immediately before the relevant day, taking
a period of leave under the old federal instrument or
under the FW Act is
entitled to continue on that leave under the new State instrument or a law of
this State for the remainder of
the period.
(2) A declared employee who has, before the relevant day, taken a step under
the old federal instrument or the FW Act that the employee
is required to take
so the employee can, on and from the relevant day, take a period of leave under
the old federal instrument or
the FW Act, is taken to have taken the step under
the new State instrument or a law of this State.
(3) The regulations may deal with other matters relating to how a new State
instrument applies to leave that, immediately before the
relevant day, is being,
or is to be, taken by a declared employee under the old federal instrument or
the FW Act.
[Section 80BK inserted: No. 30 of 2021 s. 38.]
[Part IIA: s. 80C-80S deleted: No. 43 of 2024 s. 57;
s. 80T deleted: No. 1 of 1995 s. 30;
s. 80U-80W deleted: No. 43 of 2024 s. 57;
s. 80X-80Z, 80ZA-80ZD: No. 1 of 1995 s. 31.]
Schedule 2 – List of Respondents
First Respondent City of Melville
Second Respondent City of Subiaco
Third Respondent City of Swan
Fourth Respondent Eastern Metropolitan
Regional Council
Fifth Respondent Shire of Beverley
Sixth Respondent
Shire of Boyup Brook
Seventh Respondent Shire of Bruce Rock
Eighth Respondent Shire of Capel
Ninth Respondent Shire of
Tenth Respondent Shire of Chapman Valley
Eleventh Respondent
Shire of Chittering
Twelfth Respondent Shire of Coolgardie
Respondent Shire of Coorow
Fourteenth Respondent Shire of Cuballing
Fifteenth Respondent Shire of Cunderdin
Sixteenth Respondent
Shire of Dalwallinu
Seventeenth Respondent Shire of Dandaragan
Eighteenth Respondent Shire of Dardanup
Nineteenth Respondent Shire of
Twentieth Respondent Shire of Donnybrook-Balingup
Twenty-First
Respondent Shire of Dundas
Twenty-Second Respondent Shire of East Pilbara
Twenty-Third Respondent Shire of Gingin
Twenty-Fourth Respondent Shire
of Gnowangerup
Twenty-Fifth Respondent Shire of Halls Creek
Twenty-Sixth Respondent Shire of Irwin
Twenty-Seventh
Respondent Shire of Jerramungup
Twenty-Eighth Respondent Shire of
Twenty-Ninth Respondent Shire of Kellerberrin
Respondent Shire of Koorda
Thirty-First Respondent Shire of Kulin
Thirty-Second Respondent Shire of Lake Grace
Thirty-Third Respondent
Shire of Meekatharra
Thirty-Fourth Respondent Shire of Menzies
Thirty-Fifth Respondent Shire of Merredin
Thirty-Sixth
Respondent Shire of Mingenew
Thirty-Seventh Respondent Shire of Moora
Thirty-Eighth Respondent Shire of Morawa
Thirty-Ninth Respondent Shire of Mount Magnet
Fortieth Respondent Shire of Mount Marshall
Forty-First
Respondent Shire of Mukinbudin
Forty-Second Respondent Shire of Murchison
Forty-Third Respondent Shire of Narrogin
Forty-Fourth Respondent Shire
of Ngannyatjarraku
Forty-Fifth Respondent Shire of Northam
Forty-Sixth
Respondent Shire of Nungarin
Forty-Seventh Respondent Shire of Quairading
Forty-Eighth Respondent Shire of Serpentine-Jarrahdale
Forty-Ninth
Respondent Shire of Shark Bay
Fiftieth Respondent Shire of Tammin
Fifty-First Respondent Shire of Trayning
Fifty-Second Respondent Shire
of West Arthur
Fifty-Third Respondent Shire of Wickepin
Fifty-Fourth
Respondent Shire of Williams
Fifty-Fifth Respondent Shire of
Wongan-Ballidu
Fifty-Sixth Respondent Shire of Wyalkatchem
Fifty-Seventh Respondent Town of East Fremantle
Fifty-Eighth Respondent
Town of Mosman Park
Fifty-Ninth Respondent Western Metropolitan Regional
Sixtieth Respondent Shire of Mundaring
Sixty-First
Respondent Shire of Esperance
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (256 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter