URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WACIC/2021/25.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:57:21
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
PEET [2021] WACIC 25 (2 December 2021)
CRIMINAL INJURIES COMPENSATION
ASSESSOR OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
CRIMINAL INJURIES COMPENSATION ACT 2003
[2021] WACIC 25
C F HOLYOAK-ROBERTS
DELIVERED :
25 NOVEMBER 2021
FILE NO/S :
CIC 717 of 2021
SHANE GEOFFREY PEET
Application of the phrase "as a consequence of"
- Turns on own facts
Legislation:
Criminal Injuries Compensation Act 2003
Compensation granted
Representation:
Not applicable
Solicitors:
Case(s) referred to in decision(s):
Fagan v Crimes Compensation Tribunal
[1982] 150 CLR 66
[2007] WACIC 51
Sideris v Censori [1083] WAR 17
FOR DECISIONS
Shane Geoffrey Peet
(the applicant) who was born on 18 February 1976 made an
application on 22 April 2021 for compensation for injuries
he suffered
in an incident on 3 August 2018 at Fremantle (the incident). On
29 October 2021 I awarded the applicant $20,000 compensation
injuries he suffered as a consequence of the incident. By email dated 29
October 2021 Michael Kitson (the offender) requested
for decision which are set out below.
application was made pursuant to
Criminal Injuries Compensation Act 2003
which authorises an assessor to award an applicant compensation if satisfied the
claimed injury and any claimed loss occurred
as a consequence of the commission
of a proved offence. Proved offence is defined in
of the Act to
be a crime, misdemeanour or simple offence of which a person has been convicted.
offender was charged with four offences arising out of the incident being
assault public officer, obstructing public officers,
disorderly behaviour in
public and fail to obey an order given by an officer. The charge of assault
public officer was dismissed
in the Magistrates Court at Fremantle on the
25 September 2018. The offender was convicted of the remaining 3
charges on 25 September
2018 by his own plea.
The incident
circumstances of the incident were outlined in the statement of material facts
as follows:
At about 10:00pm on Friday the 3rd of August 2018, Police were conducting foot
patrols on South Terrace, Fremantle.
The officers were wearing high visibility vests and full uniform.
The accused approached one of the officers. While the accused was talking to the
officer he touched the officer on his left shoulder
twice. The officer politely
requested that accused stop this. The accused has placed his hand on the
officers shoulder a third time.
As a result of the officer's request, the accused took offence and began to
swear and abuse the Police officers. He said 'You cunts
think you own the place.
That's why everyone hates you cunts.' Police warned him about his language and
behaviour but the accused
continued with the disorderly behaviour. As result, he
was issued with a Move on order.
The accused began walking off. He stopped and turned to the officers and said
'Fuck off I'm not going to leave.' He sat down and
continued to swear at Police.
He was warned again to leave the area and stop swearing. While sitting down he
shouted, 'I'm a free
man, fuck off cunts, arrest me. I'll make you cunts work
As a result of this, Police approached the accused and said that he was under
arrest for disorderly and breaching a move on order.
As the officers attempted
to take hold of his arm, he stood up and began to struggle with officers.
He was eventually placed in handcuffs and placed in the rear of the Police
He was transported to the Perth Watch house due to his aggressive state.
The accused was released by way of summons.
And further.
At 10:00 pm on Friday the 3rd of August 2018, the accused was on South Terrace
near Nicks Place in Fremantle.
He was issued with a Move On Order (MO422353) due to him behaving in a
disorderly manner. The conditions of the order were read to
the accused and he
was advised that he had to leave the area until 06:00am on Saturday the 4th
August 2018. A perimeter of no less
than 1km. A copy of the order was given to
At about 10:15 pm the accused walked a few meters towards Nicks Place and
stopped. He turned to the officers and said, 'Fuck off
I'm not going to leave.'
He walked over to a nearby public bench on the footpath and sat down and
continued to swear at Police. He
was warned again to leave the area and stop
swearing. While sitting down he shouted, 'I'm a free man, fuck off cunts arrest
make you cunts work for it.'
As a result of this, Police approached the accused and advised him he was under
arrest for disorderly and breaching a move on order.
As the officers attempted
to take hold of his arms he stood up and began to struggle with officers.
He was eventually placed in handcuffs and placed in the rear of the Police
He was transported to the Perth Watch house due to his aggressive state.
The accused was released by way of summons.
At 10:15pm on 3rd of August 2018, the accused was outside nicks kebabs, South
Terrace Fremantle.
The accused was advised that he was under arrest for breaching his move on order
and disorderly behaviour.
The accused stood up. Police requested the accused place his hands behind his
back. He refused and lashed out at Police.
A struggle ensued. The accused was requested several times to stop resisting.
While police were attempting to restrain the accused,
he lashed out and
attempted to slap the officer to the face. The officer moved his head to avoid
being slapped.
The accused was forced to the ground and continued to struggle with the
officers. Police managed to place one handcuff on his left
wrist, however due to
him still struggling violently police were unable to place the other cuff on his
other wrist. He was again
requested several times to stop resisting so that they
could place the other handcuff on his wrist. He continued to shout 'Fuck off.'
Further officers attended and assisted in placing the accused in handcuffs but
he still continued to struggle.
During the struggle S/C PEET sustained an injury to his left shoulder namely
soreness and he also sustained bruising to his right
The accused was eventually placed in the rear of the Police vehicle.
Due to his aggressive behaviour he was transported to the Perth Watch house.
And further,
While police were attempting to restrain the accused, he lashed out and
attempted to slap the officer to the face. The officer moved
his head to avoid
being slapped.
The accused was forced to the ground and continued to struggle with the
Other officers attended the scene to assist in restraining the accused. He was
eventually placed in handcuffs but still continued
to struggle.
He was placed in the rear of the Police vehicle and transported to the watch
house where he was released by way of summons.
The alleged assault was recorded by CCTV.
assault public officer charge which was discontinued, related to the offender
attempting to slap the applicant to the face.
support of his application the applicant provided a supporting statement dated
19 April 2021. He described the circumstances
of the incident and
said whilst talking to the offender, the offender slapped his left shoulder. He
asked the offender to stop.
After asking him to stop the offender slapped the
applicants left shoulder with more force. The applicant again asked him to
The offender ignored the request and placed his hands on the applicants
left shoulder and again the applicant asked him not to touch
him and to release
his hold. He said the offender took offence to this and became abusive. The
applicant's partner warned the offender
several times about his behaviour and
language, but the offender continued to shout obscenities. As a result of this
police issued
a move on order to the offender the conditions of which were read
to him. The offender walked approximately 10 metres and turned
applicant and his partner and spoke to them abusively and sat down. He was
again requested by the applicant to leave the
area as per the move on order and
he was advised that if he did not, he would be arrested. The offender refused
and continued to
be abusive to police. As a result of his behaviour the
offender was informed by the applicant and his partner that he was under
The applicant's partner requested the offender place his hands behind his back
which he refused to do and lashed out. The
applicant attempted to take hold of
the offender by the arm, but he struggled violently. During the struggle the
applicant alleged
the offender attempted to slap him in the face (which
constituted the discontinued assault public officer charge) and the applicant
managed to move his head out of the path to avoid the slap. He said the
offender continued to struggle and was forced to the ground
in order for
officers to gain control. The applicant repeatedly requested the offender to
stop struggling. The offender refused
to comply and continued to do so. Police
eventually placed the offender in handcuffs, but he continued to act
aggressively. With
the assistance of other officers, the offender was placed in
the rear of the police vehicle and transported to the Perth watch house.
the course of investigating the circumstances of the incident I obtained
information from the West Australian Police. It
is not clear to me from the
information provided why the assault public officer charge was discontinued but
in my view nothing turned
on this as the applicant said the cause of his injury
was as a result of the offender resisting arrest thereby obstructing public
officers in the discharge of their duties. Given the offender pled guilty to
that charge and was convicted I was satisfied a proved
offence as defined in
section 12 of the Act was constituted.
applicant said during the struggle he felt a sharp pain in his left shoulder
causing him to yell out in pain. He said he also
sustained bruising to his right
knee. He said after the incident the pain got worse such that he had difficulty
moving his left
shoulder. This progressed to constant pain and limited movement
which would not subside even with the assistance of pain killers.
attended his general practitioner for treatment. He said he was referred for
physiotherapy treatment and continued to
suffer pain and discomfort and limited
movement. He was also given a steroid injection and continued with
physiotherapy. Despite
the steroid injection and physiotherapy, he said he was
still in severe pain and had limited movement. He was referred for a second
steroid injection which he underwent. He said he continued to suffer pain in
his left shoulder which he medicated with painkillers.
He said he was unable to
fully move his shoulder without feeling discomfort and hearing clicking sounds.
He said he was left with
pain in the left shoulder requiring pain killers to
manage. He said this impacted on his personal life as he is sometimes unable
carry his normal activities such as lifting or activities requiring constant use
of his shoulder. This caused him to become frustrated.
He said the incident
caused him to become apprehensive when he had to physically intervene with an
applicant submitted a first certificate of capacity. It was recorded he
complained pain in his left shoulder. When struggling
with a person being
restrained suffering pain and limited movement. The clinical finding was
restricted abduction and extension
with shoulder crepitus. He was diagnosed with
a rotator cuff injury to the left shoulder.
applicant also submitted a progress certificate of capacity dated
22 August 2018 identifying the applicant had been referred
physiotherapy and an ultrasound guided steroid injection. He had some capacity
for work from 16 to 30 August 2018 performing
modified or
alternative duties. It was recommended he have a further steroid injection if
required and to continue physiotherapy.
The diagnosis was left shoulder strain
with bursitis.
applicant was assessed on the 30 August 2018 with a similar outcome
according to the certificate of that date. He was further
assessed on the
25 September 2018 and according to the progress certificate of
capacity had a full range of movement with slight
pain but still felt clicking.
He was to continue with physiotherapy. The applicant also submitted a copy of
the referral for the
ultrasound guided steroid injection to the left shoulder
and an ultrasound scan and referral to the same shoulder.
applicant submitted an invoice for his attendance at his general practitioner on
the 13 August 2018 in the sum of $139.40, 22
August 2018 in
the sum of $76.30, 29 August 2018 in the sum of $76 and
25 September 2018 in the sum of $76.30 the amounts for which
allowed as they could be submitted to the Western Australia Police for payment.
The applicant also submitted an invoice/receipt
for physiotherapy for the
22 August 2018 in the sum of $115 for which no allowance was made
given he could submit that to the Western
Australia Police for payment.
Information was requested from the Western Australia Police as to the medical
expenses and or wage
losses paid by them in relation to the applicant and his
incident. The Western Australia Police advised that the sum of $609.70
medical expenses was paid described as from provider the Perth Radiological
Notice to the offender
to section 19 of the Act a notice was issued to the offender on
25 August 2021 advising him of the applicant's application
inviting him to make any submissions he chose to make with respect to the
applicant's application. On the 3 September 2021 the
offender emailed
the Office of Criminal Injuries Compensation advising the letter had come as a
surprise. He said he was not convicted
of any assault. He said he had contacted
his lawyers who advised him his file was in storage and he did not have the
money to spend
on lawyers to retrieve it. He asked for a copy of the
application and supporting material and lamented the applicants delay in lodging
the application. He said he had assistance from his Union to prepare the email
whom he cc'd.
email dated 21 September 2021 the offender was provided with
permissible documents the applicant submitted in support of his application.
email dated 11 October 2021 the offender responded to the notice
issued on 25 September 2021. He alleged the applicant had been
untruthful as the offender was not convicted of any assault. He said he had not
been provided with information concerning other
benefits and payments the
applicant had received for this injury alleging he may have been entitled to
workers compensation which
was not the case as the applicant was a police
officer injured during the course of his duties and there is no statutory
compensation scheme as relates to police officers. He lamented he was
not convicted of any offence in relation to an injury to the
applicant's
shoulder. He requested copies of documents the applicant provided to police
including a statement identifying no reference
to a knee injury and questioned
the cause of the bursitis for which the applicant required injections. He said
the incident arose
when he put money in a busker's tin and, affected by alcohol,
suggested police do the same. He alleged this conduct was the approach
officers referred to in the statement of material facts. He denied making
submissions were taken into account by me when assessing the applicant's
application.
response to the offender’s submissions was provided to the applicant's
submissions by the case manager on the 9 November
Quantum of injury
award the applicant compensation, I am required to be satisfied on the balance
of probabilities, the applicant suffered injury
as a consequence of the
commission of the proved offence. In
Fagan v Crimes Compensation Tribunal
[1982] 150 CLR 66
Mason and Wilson JJ said at 673:-
There is no basis in the context of the Act itself for regarding the words as
having a narrow operation. The words are ordinary English
words carrying no
special technical meaning. All that is required is a causal relationship; both
the word "by" and the phrase "as
a result of" indicate a causal connexion.
Whether that relationship exists or not is primarily a question of fact. The
other unconnected events may also have had some relationship to the
occurrence is not material if the criminal act was a cause, even
if not the sole
cause. The only requirement is that the injury is caused "by or as a result" a
criminal act.
Sideris v Censori
[1083] WAR 17
said consideration of the phrase ‘as a consequence of’ is not to
determine “whether the injury was
remote or proximate” but whether
it was as a consequence of the commission of the offence. This requires
consideration of whether
the injuries suffered by the applicant were
“causally connected” to the offence to entitle the applicant to
compensation
[2007] WACIC 51.
reviewed the evidence available to me I was satisfied the applicant suffered a
physical injury by way of bruising to his knee
and a more serious injury to his
left shoulder namely a rotator cuff injury, and left shoulder strain with
bursitis. I was satisfied
on the evidence available to me this caused the
applicant acute concern for a period of time which required two injections into
shoulder to alleviate the pain as well as ongoing physiotherapy to improve
movement. Whilst these treatments went a substantial way
to improving the
applicant's symptoms I was satisfied he remained symptomatic and continued to do
so which required the use of pain
killers at times. I was satisfied there was a
causal connection between the applicant’s injuries and the offences, the
having stated he sustained the injuries whilst struggling to arrest
the offender for the charges of which he was convicted. Whilst
this caused him
some psychological
, I was not satisfied the psychological
was sufficiently enduring to constitute mental and nervous shock
pursuant to section 35 of the Act. Therefore, I awarded the applicant
$20,000 for his physical related symptoms.
the applicant submitted invoices for treatment with his general practitioner and
physiotherapist there was no specific claim
for losses. In any event as the
injuries occurred during the course of his duties as a police officer the
applicant was entitled
to have those expenses paid by the Western Australia
Police and ought to have submitted those invoices to them.
therefore awarded the applicant $20,000 compensation for his injuries.
certify that the preceding paragraph(s) comprise the reasons for decision of the
Criminal Injuries Compensation Assessor of Western
C F Holyoak-Roberts, CHIEF ASSESSOR OF CRIMINAL INJURIES COMPENSATION
2 DECEMBER 2021
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (172 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter