URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WASAT/2025/113.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:07:05
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
C [2025] WASAT 113 (16 October 2025)
STATE ADMINISTRATIVE
GUARDIANSHIP AND ADMINISTRATION ACT 1990
[2025] WASAT 113
MS K LANG, MEMBER
11 SEPTEMBER 2025
DELIVERED :
11 SEPTEMBER 2025
PUBLISHED :
16 OCTOBER 2025
FILE NO/S :
GAA 3955 of 2025
GAA 3993 of 2025
Represented Person
Guardianship and administration - Applications
for the appointment of guardian and administrator - Applications to intervene in
power of guardianship - Represented person with diagnosis of dementia -
Whether need for an administrator and a guardian - Niece
appointed under
enduring powers of attorney and guardianship - Attorney transferred the bulk of
the estate of the represented person
to bank account in her name - Contract to
build granny flat at attorney's residence - Conflict of interest - Need for
administrator
and guardian - No less restrictive means to meet needs - Enduring
power of attorney and guardianship revoked - Public Advocate appointed
guardian for accommodation decisions due to niece's conflict of interest -
Public Trustee appointed plenary administrator
- Niece appointed limited
guardian for treatment and services
Legislation:
Guardianship and Administration Act 1990
Mental Health Act 2014
Enduring Power of Attorney revoked
Enduring Power
of Guardianship revoked
Public Trustee appointed plenary
administrator
Public Advocate appointed limited guardian for accommodation
Applicant appointed limited guardian for treatment and services
Representation:
Represented Person
Solicitors:
Represented Person
Case(s) referred to in decision(s):
[2020] WASAT 100
FOR DECISION OF THE TRIBUNAL
Introduction
) brought applications under the
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1990
) for guardianship and
administration orders for her aunt, C.
is a 79 year old woman with significant cognitive impairment due to dementia.
She appointed R as her enduring attorney and guardian
shortly before she was
admitted to hospital under the
Mental Health Act 2014
for six months. C was eventually discharged to live
with R as she is not able to live independently.
signed a contract to build a granny flat on her property to accommodate C and
transferred money from C's bank account into her
own account to pay for the
building works. C's bank (
) raised concerns and froze the
accounts which led to R's applications.
actions created a conflict of interest and breached her legal responsibilities
as attorney under the GA Act. I revoked the enduring
powers of attorney and
guardianship and appointed the Public Trustee (
) as administrator of
C's estate. I appointed the Public Advocate guardian for accommodation
decisions and appointed R guardian with
treatment and services functions.
are my reasons for those decisions.
Legislation
appoint an administrator under s 64 of the GA Act I must be satisfied that
the proposed represented person is unable by reason
of a mental disability to
make reasonable judgments about all or any part of their estate and that they
are in need of an administrator
appoint a guardian under s 43(1) of the GA Act I must be satisfied that the
represented person has attained the aged of 18 years,
(a) incapable
of looking after their own health and safety;
(b) unable to make reasonable judgments about their person; or
(c) in need of oversight care or control in the interests of their own health
and safety and in need of a guardian.
satisfied that a person is a person for whom orders can and should be made, I
must then consider who should be
matters such as the scope of the authority and the duration of any orders made.
Principles to be observed
Tribunal must observe s 4 of the GA Act in all proceedings brought under
the GA Act.
principles provide that the primary concern of the Tribunal is the best
interests of the person for whom an application is
principles also provide that every person is presumed to be capable of looking
after their own health and safety; making reasonable
judgments in respect of
matters relating to their person; managing their own affairs; and making
reasonable judgments in respect
of matters relating to their estate, until the
contrary is proved to the satisfaction of the
should not be made unless they are needed; if the needs of the person can be met
by less restrictive means, then guardianship
and administration orders should
not be made.
an order is made it should impose the least restrictions possible on the
person's freedom of decision and
guardian should not be appointed if a limited order will meet the needs of the
represented person.
the Tribunal should seek to ascertain the person's views and wishes as expressed
at the time or gathered from their previous
What the Tribunal must decide
questions to be decided in applications for the appointment of a guardian and an
administrator are:
(a) Is the presumption of capacity set aside and
is C a person for whom a guardian and administrator may be appointed?
(b) If so, is C in need of those orders?
(c) Are the Enduring Power of Attorney (
) and Enduring Power of
Guardianship (
) less restrictive means to meet C's financial and
personal decision-making needs? This is the central question to be determined,
along with:
(d) If C is in need of guardianship and administration orders, who should be
appointed in those roles?
Evidence and material before the Tribunal
the hearing I heard evidence from R and C by telephone, the Public Advocate's
investigator (
investigator)
in person and the Public Trustee's
trust manager who also attended by telephone.
addition to the oral evidence, I had regard to documents including the
(a) Psychiatric Report of Dr TS dated 6 August 2025,
stating that the represented person has a diagnosis of major depression and
and lacks capacity in all domains of decision-making.
(b) A report of HB, registered nurse, stating that R is a very supportive
niece. She and her family are very caring and have accommodated
finances, requiring around the clock care
and requiring one to two people for
transfers. She requires full assistance with all of her activities of daily
living and does
not have insight into her condition. She is a high falls
risk and a swallowing risk, requiring semi thickened fluids.
(c) R's application for a Centrelink carer's payment and allowance signed by
Dr AM of [Suburb] Hospital, stating that C is diagnosed
with mixed Alzheimer's
and vascular dementia, and other physical ailments, first diagnosed in
(d) Discharge Summaries for the long hospital stay from 3 December 2024
to 3 June 2025, confirming the admission under the MH Act
as C lacked capacity
to consent to a voluntary admission. Her primary issues are noted as postural
hypotension, memory concerns,
depression with catatonic features and delusions.
Cognitive decline was recorded as being evident for the previous six months.
The hospital notes record that in August and September 2024 C's memory
failure was observed including missed medical appointments,
not eating, low mood
and not taking her medications. She received many electroconvulsive treatments
during her six-month admission.
Her diagnosis with mixed dementia was confirmed
with an MRI on 23 December 2024 which revealed neurodegenerative changes.
Additional comments in the Hospital records state, '[a] clear few years
history of cognitive decline, as evidenced by her collateral
history. She
became increasingly forgetful and required prompts from her carers to take her
medications ...'.
(e) C's EPG dated 15 October 2024 which appoints R as sole enduring guardian
authorising all functions to be exercised without restriction.
witnessed by Dr MT, general practitioner, and VT, registered nurse.
(f) C's EPA dated 15 November 2024 which appoints R as sole attorney, with
the power to continue in force notwithstanding the donor's
subsequent legal
incapacity. The EPA is also witnessed by Dr MT, general practitioner, and VT,
registered nurse.
(g) R's written submissions, statements setting out decisions under the EPA
and EPG and C's assets and expenditure.
(h) Various bank statements lodged by R.
(i) Report from the home care package service provider confirming that C
relies heavily on R as she is unable to manage independently.
R supplements and
has had to make significant life sacrifices to sustain this arrangement as the
sufficient for the level of care C needs.
(j) Investigator's report dated 9 September 2025.
(k) Contract to construct a granny flat for $285,000 signed by Granny Flats
C's evidence
attended the hearing by telephone with R and confirmed her wish to remain living
with R. She readily stated that a granny flat
was to be built at R's property,
so she did not have to move into aged care but was unable to expand on this
subject. C was hesitant
in her response to questions and unable to make a
meaningful contribution during the hearing.
has expressed her wish both in the hearing and previously to others including
the investigator that she wants to live with R and
does not want to move into
aged care. C told the investigator she would like R to continue to manage all
of her affairs.
previously lodged written communication with the Tribunal during her son's own
administration and guardianship proceedings indicated
her confidence in R and
wish that R be appointed as the son's guardian and
administrator.
The execution
of the EPA and the EPG in 2024 also reflect C's trust in R.
am satisfied that C's views and wishes are for R to continue to manage her
personal and financial affairs on her behalf.
R's evidence
gave evidence on oath and testified that she is a disability support worker and
has always been close to C.
is the administrator and guardian of C's disabled son who lives in supported
accommodation.
has never married and is estranged from her extended family. R and C had
discussed building a granny flat for C so she could live
out her years with R,
but this was unaffordable until C's aunt died in October 2024 and left her
an inheritance.
was living alone with home care services provided by [service provider] in a
house owned by the aunt until her hospitalisation
in December 2024.
3 June C was discharged from hospital to live with R and her family on their
2.5-acre property. C moved into a converted carport
which was formerly occupied
by R's son and the son moved into his parents' bedroom.
requires full time support and supervision with her high care needs, including
assistance with all of her activities of daily living.
She requires two
people to assist her with transfers and equipment including a standing hoist and
hospital bed.
the day of C's hospital discharge, R and the builder signed the granny flat
building contract for
written submissions state the granny flat will 'cater for [C] and a support
worker, allowing [C] to live her days out in an environment
which she felt safe
and cared for' ... '[C] has been a part of all meetings and plan reviews'. [C]
will pay the full cost of the
granny flat and the cost of land works and septic
granny flat design includes two bedrooms, two bathrooms, kitchen and living area
and is built specifically for C's needs including
wheelchair accessibility.
submissions states, '[C] is deemed as High Care as she required assistance with
every aspect of daily living. Including Personal
Care, Showering, Drying,
Dressing, Full assistance with Toileting, transferring into chair or bed, Meal
Preparation, Medications,
Driving her to appointments
has reduced her working hours from five days to one day per week to care for C.
A private support worker is paid $40 per hour
The bank transactions
testified that when C appointed R as her enduring attorney in November 2024, she
had two bank accounts at Bank 1 with balances
under $1,000; one was C's
'Retirement' account for her age pension and the other C had called her
'Christmas Club' account. C also
had a bank account at Bank 2 with a balance of
$8.00 and no other assets.
inheritance of $400,000 was deposited into her Christmas Club account in April
4 June 2025 R opened a bank account in her own name at Bank 1 and called this
the Granny Flat account (
R's account
5 June 2025 R transferred $5,000 from C's Christmas Club account into R's
account. The next day, R transferred $20,000 from C's
account into R's account.
Over the next two weeks R made a further 14 withdrawals, each of $20,000,
from C's account into R's account.
1 raised concerns and froze C's accounts, leading to R's applications. $91,000
remained in C's Christmas Club account; R's
account balance of $301,260 was
entirely derived from C's funds.
23 June 2025, R paid the builder the $18,500 deposit for the granny flat.
transferred the balance of R's account ($281,000) to a second bank (
) called '[C] G Granny Flat Account' (
Bank 2 Account
) which she
opened on 29 July 2025. She describes this account as a joint account for R and
Bank 1 was persuaded by R's lawyer to unfreeze C's
undated bank statement lodged by R indicates that R transferred $337,485.98 to
the Bank 2 Account. R agreed that C's funds were
the source of the entire
balance of the Bank 2 Account.
did not identify these withdrawals from C's account into her own account in her
lodged list of assets and transactions.
did not notify Centrelink that she had withdrawn C's money and deposited it into
her accounts or that she intended to spend $285,000
of C's funds on a granny
flat on her own property (plus unquantified associated building
Public Advocate's Investigator's evidence
investigator filed her report and testified at the hearing. Her evidence
is summarised below.
had dementia or major cognitive impairment by the time R signed the $285,000
granny flat contract which amounted to a substantial
gift to R. C could not
consent to gifting to R for any purpose. It would not be appropriate to gift
this amount to her enduring
attorney. There is no contract between R and C
regarding funding or gifting. The granny flat would belong to R as it was to be
constructed on R's property.
1's actions to freeze C's accounts were understandable, as were its concerns.
is clear or should have been clear to R that C could not consent by June 2025 to
a financial decision of this amount and this
would not be in C's best interests
with R primarily benefitting from gifting her $285,000 to build the granny flat.
This is highlighted
by C not being able to even tell the investigator how much
the granny flat cost.
investigator interviewed C who said she trusts R for financial and personal
matters. C did not remember that the granny flat
was progressing. She
remembered meeting with people to discuss the possibility of it being built. C
was unable to provide any other
details regarding the granny flat.
confirmed to the investigator that C is paying the entire cost of the granny
flat as she does not want to move into residential
care. R and C had a
verbal agreement to build the granny flat for C's accommodation until her
was unable to give details of her ongoing expenses but indicated she likes to
give money to her son D.
provided a list of C's outgoings including utilities for a house in [suburb]
where C resided in 2024. This house was owned by
her deceased aunt and R
advised C was meant to inherit it, but the aunt's business is still the
registered owner. R advised the
investigator C was still paying for the
outgoings for the house.
confirmed that C has a level 4 home care package which provides 1.5 hours
personal care per day, so they have private supports
assisting as well.
explained the applications were made because Bank 1 had locked C's accounts.
The bank had concerns that C may be taken advantage
of as one of the accounts
was called Granny Flat. The bank accounts were locked for up to six weeks
before R's lawyer assisted her
to reverse Bank 1's decision.
told the investigator that she and C decided to transfer C's money into R's bank
account because C wanted to make sure R could
access the funds in case the banks
locked the accounts again. C did not want R to be left having to pay for the
granny flat.
investigator raised concerns that the building contract essentially amounts to a
$285,000 gift to R. C is 79 years old with
progressive dementia and high care
needs and may not be able to reside in the granny flat for long.
accounts indicate $352,000 is unaccounted for and R as attorney has provided no
transparency. R will obtain a significant financial
benefit from the granny
flat construction on her property. R has not protected C's estate, kept
reasonable records or acted in C's
best interests. R has a clear conflict of
interest having made financial decisions which are self-enriching and therefore
not appropriate
under the EPA
requires a substitute decision-maker as a result of her cognitive impairment.
The investigator submitted that the EPA is not acting
as a less restrictive
alternative to an administration order.
investigator concluded that R is not a suitable person to act as attorney or
administrator.
PT is best appointed to make financial decisions due to R's conflict of
investigator recommended that the Public Advocate be appointed as C's guardian
for future accommodation decisions due to R's
conflict of interest. If the
granny flat is built and C's health continues to deteriorate a decision may be
required to move C into
a residential care facility.
R was willing to continue to make treatment and services decisions for C the
investigator suggested that R could be appointed
guardian with those functions.
There is no suggestion that she has not acted in C's best interests in that
response to this evidence, R testified that all she wanted was to look after C.
For someone to come in and say that she is taking
advantage of her is hurtful
and inaccurate.
agreed that the building of a two bedroom, two bathroom extension with kitchen
and living area would substantially increase the
value of her own property. She
did not dispute that this presented a conflict of interest in her role as C's
attorney but testified
that C had wanted to do this for a long time and that it
was for C's benefit.
did not dispute that C wanted her disabled son to inherit her entire estate. R
knew that the granny flat contract would very significantly
benefit R and her
family while drastically reducing the son's inheritance, which is relevant to
her role as his administrator. She
testified that the son would likely
stay over in the granny flat in the future.
potential conflict of interest in her role as administrator of the son's estate
is a matter for another proceeding.
testified that she had sacrificed a lot to care for C in her home including
moving her 10 year old son out of his converted bedroom
in the carport to
accommodate C. The son was now sleeping in his parents' bedroom with R and her
was only able to work one day a week now because of C's high care needs. She
testified that if the granny flat did not go ahead,
she would have to find
full-time work. Her son could not stay in her bedroom. The implication was
that C would have to move into
did not have a written agreement with C regarding the granny flat because her
lawyer said it was not urgent.
agreed that she would be willing to be appointed as limited guardian for
treatment and services decisions.
Legal obligations of attorneys acting under an EPA
signed the EPA on 15 November 2024. It was styled to be in effect from
execution, gives no directions to the attorney and does
not authorise gifts. C
signed the EPG on 15 October 2024 and both documents are witnessed by a general
practitioner and nurse.
was no challenge to the validity of the EPA and EPG at the hearing. Medical
evidence indicates that C long struggled with
cognitive impairment. She was
formally diagnosed with dementia in December 2024 with the benefit of the MRI
revealing brain changes
consistent with Alzheimers.
is a presumption of capacity and I do not need to reach any view about C's
capacity to understand and execute these documents.
I am satisfied for
other reasons that the EPA and EPG must be revoked.
attorney acting under an EPA accepts certain statutory obligations which are set
out in s 107 of the GA Act.
Section 107
Obligations
(1) The donee of an enduring power of
(a) shall exercise his powers as attorney with reasonable diligence to
protect the interests of the donor and, if he fails to do so,
he is liable to
the donor for any loss occasioned by the failure;
(b) shall keep and preserve accurate records and accounts of all dealings and
transactions made under the power;
(c) subject to section 109(2), may not renounce a power during any
period of legal incapacity of the donor; and
(d) shall, if the donee becomes bankrupt, report that bankruptcy to the State
Administrative Tribunal.
Penalty applicable to paragraph (b): $2 000[.]
stated by Member Child in
[2020] WASAT 100:
addition to the statutory obligations created in s 107 of the GA Act, the donees
under an EPA have fiduciary obligations to the
donor as agents of the
objective of fiduciary duties is to 'preclude the fiduciary from being swayed by
considerations of personal interest and from
accordingly misusing the fiduciary
position for personal advantage' and to ensure fiduciaries 'conduct themselves
at a higher standard
than the ordinary person'. The standard they impose is one
of 'undivided loyalty by the fiduciary to the principal'. A fiduciary
'duty which impacts upon conscience by requiring the [agent] to treat the
[principal's] interests as paramount' (Dal Pont
Law of Agency
Lexis Nexis Butterworths, Australia 2014).
learned author goes on to say that:
[D]onees of powers of attorney ('attorneys') as fiduciary agents, must not
exercise their authority in such a way contrary to the
interests of their
principal. So, like other agents, a donee of a power of attorney is, in the
absence of a clear power to do so,
prohibited from utilising that authority to
pay personal debts, or make presents to himself or herself or to others of the
principal's
Child further stated at [47]:
Re The Full Board of the Guardianship and Administration Board
[2003] WASCA 268
His Honour, EM Heenan J when considering other provisions of
the GA Act described at [43] - [44] the protective intention of the
GA Act when
considering dispositions which might be made:
it is obvious that the legislation is designed for the protection of adult
persons whose faculties may be impaired, for any reason,
and who are therefore
in need of protection and assistance so as to ensure that their financial
affairs and other welfare is not
jeopardised by improvident, or ill-considered
personal decisions or action, or by unscrupulous or ill-advised influence of
friends and others who may deliberately or inadvertently exploit the
vulnerability of the person in need of assistance and protection.
The emphasis is on conserving the property and financial resources of the
disabled person to ensure that they are available for
his or her own needs,
welfare and enjoyment and are not dissipated. These seem to be the primary
objectives of the legislation and
all the provisions of the Act can be seen
to have meaning and effect as leading towards the achievement of those purposes.
main, these will be accomplished by conserving the resources and property
of the person under administration for use to his or her
own advantage or, in
cases where expenditure or imminent disposition of property are necessary or
advantageous, by scrutinising the
transaction to see that it is justifiable or
provident having regard to all the circumstances, bearing always in mind the
and future needs of the person whose estate is under
administration.
the protective intent of the legislation is clear.
lack of capacity reinforces R's fiduciary obligations to her because of her
complete reliance and dependence on her. Although
R may have acted without
unscrupulous intent she has not fulfilled the obligations upon her.
R lodged a confusing assortment of undated, poorly identified bank accounts and
an incomplete list of financial records
in response to Tribunal orders. These
materials show many unexplained withdrawals from C's accounts. Transactions
during C's lengthy
hospitalisation and the payment of utilities and rates for
properties which C does not own raise particular concerns which R did
satisfactorily clarify.
has failed to keep and preserve accurate records and accounts of all dealings
and transactions made under the EPA in breach of
the legal obligations under the
R has not acted with reasonable diligence to protect C's interests. She has
used the majority of C's estate to enhance
the value of her own property without
consideration for her future needs or personal wishes regarding her son.
to losing capacity, there is no evidence that C intended to give R a large
amount of money. To the contrary, her written wishes
were to leave her entire
estate to her disabled
makes no specific provision for gifting.
decision to build a granny flat on her property entirely at C's expense gave
rise to an obvious conflict, which she did not dispute.
The fact that C would
be able to live on R's property and gain benefit from this decision did not
eliminate the conflict.
could have taken steps to address the conflict but did not. She could have
sought directions from the Tribunal before entering
into the building
was aware of the conflict of interest and had consulted a lawyer about drafting
a deed declaring the granny flat a gift from C
to R. This did not proceed
but the conflict was clearly apparent. There is no evidence that R sought
independent legal advice on
C's behalf or intended to repay her estate for the
significant value she received.
is no evidence that R weighed up any other relevant considerations on C's
behalf, such as:
(1) The short-term benefit that C would likely
obtain from the granny flat given that she is a very frail 79 year old with
comorbidities, high care needs including requiring two people to assist
her with all transfers. There was a strong likelihood that
C's care needs would
soon exceed R's ability to care for C at home.
(2) If C is unable to continue living with R there is no agreement protecting
her investment and enabling her to pay for alternative
accommodation.
(3) The granny flat is described as two bedroom, two bathroom to provide
accommodation for C's round the clock carers but there is
no evidence that C can
afford such care now that her estate is depleted by the cost of these building
(4) R's failure to notify Centrelink that she had depleted C's accounts as
required by law. Centrelink would likely consider the
withdrawal of $350,000 a
large gift to R with potential repercussions on C's pension entitlements and
eligibility for subsidised
aged care in the future.
(5) Whether R should share the cost of the granny flat given the significant
enhanced value to her property.
(6) The failure to acknowledge C's desire to leave her estate to her disabled
son. R took no steps to legally recognise or protect
C's interest in her
property or undertake to repay her estate if the property was sold in the
future, for instance.
transferring C's money into accounts under her own name, R's actions were
contrary to C's interests.
summary, R did not keep clear records of the myriad transactions on C's accounts
or particularise her transfers from C's accounts
to an acceptable standard and
breached the legal responsibilities of an attorney under the GA Act. R has
failed to demonstrate careful
consideration and understanding of C's financial
situation including her future needs, failed to give any consideration to C's
for her son and cannot be said to have acted with reasonable diligence in
respect of the conflict of interest.
evidence establishes that R is unable to discharge her legal obligations and the
EPA is not a less restrictive option to the
making of an administration
conflict of interest extends to the EPG, in particular decisions about C's
accommodation needs.
is no doubt that C lacks the capacity now to understand the ramifications of the
granny flat contract, but I accept that she
wishes for it to go ahead so she can
live with R.
has provided a home to C and I accept her evidence that she is genuine in her
affections for C and that they are very close. However,
the evidence is clear
that C's estate has been significantly diminished since R has assumed management
of her estate as her attorney
acting under the EPA.
accept the submission of the investigator which was on the whole not
contradicted by R.
Administration order
am satisfied that the presumption of capacity is displaced based on the medical
and other evidence of the represented person's
dementia and consequent cognitive
impairment. I am satisfied and I find that the represented person is unable by
reason of her dementia
to make reasonable judgments about her estate and is in
need of an administrator of her estate. For the reasons given, the EPA is
less restrictive means by which her financial decision-making needs can be
am satisfied that the represented person is in need of an administrator to
manage her estate in her best interests.
not consistent with her wishes as expressed during the hearing, and in her past
actions in appointing R to manage her finances
or in her comments to the
investigator when she expressed confidence in R's management of her affairs, I
am satisfied that it is
in the best interests of the represented person that the
Public Trustee be appointed as the plenary administrator of her estate and
the EPA be revoked.
has long provided a regular allowance to D for his social activities and I
therefore include a gifting authority of $3,500 per
annum to enable this to
Guardianship
am satisfied that the presumption that the represented person is capable of
making reasonable judgments about her person is displaced.
The evidence
overwhelmingly demonstrates that the represented person has a dementia with
significant cognitive impairment and is
reliant on others for all her care needs
am satisfied on the evidence of the health professionals, which is not in
dispute, that the represented person is incapable of
looking after her own
health and safety, unable to make reasonable judgments about her person and is
in need of oversight and care
in the interests of her own health and safety.
evidence clearly demonstrates that R has a conflict of interest in making
decisions about where C shall live in the future as
she has a financial interest
in the granny flat being built on her property. For this reason, I am satisfied
and I find that the
EPG does not operate to meet the best interests of the
represented person and should be revoked in the best interests of the
represented
person, despite her wishes.
am satisfied and I find that the represented person is in need of a guardian to
make decisions about her accommodation, medical
treatment and appropriate
support services.
R has a conflict of interest relating to C's accommodation and no other person
has indicated a willingness for
appointment
represented person's guardian, I am satisfied that it is appropriate and in the
best interests of the represented person that
the Public Advocate be appointed
her limited guardian for decisions concerning where C should live and with whom.
has indicated that she is willing to continue making decisions on C's behalf
concerning treatment and services. This is supported
by the investigator and
consistent with C's wishes. I therefore appoint R as the limited guardian for
those functions.
am satisfied that the limited functions are sufficient to meet the current needs
of the represented person and there is no need
for a plenary order.
Duration of the orders
C's condition is progressive, I am satisfied that the orders should be made for
two years at which time it would be appropriate
to review if the conflicts
of interest are satisfactorily resolved.
the reasons given I made the following declarations and
GAA 3955/2025
The Tribunal makes the following orders:
Tribunal declares that the represented person, [C] is:
(a) unable,
by reason of a mental disability, to make reasonable judgments in respect of
matters relating to all of her estate;
(b) in need of an administrator of her estate;
(c) incapable of looking after her own health and safety;
(d) unable to make reasonable judgments in respect of matters relating to her
(e) in need of oversight, care or control in the interests of her own health
and safety; and
(f) in need of a guardian.
Administration
order made on 5 September 2025 pursuant to
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1990
(WA) is revoked.
Public Trustee of 553 Hay Street, Perth, Western Australia is appointed plenary
administrator of the represented person's estate
with all the powers and duties
conferred by the
Guardianship and Administration Act 1990
administrator is authorised to expend up to a total amount of $3,500 per annum
on gifts on behalf of the represented person.
administrator is directed to investigate all transactions made by the attorney
[R] pursuant to the enduring power of attorney
dated 15 November 2024.
enduring power of attorney dated 15 November 2024 by which the represented
person appointed [R] to be her attorney, is revoked.
administration order is to be reviewed before 11 September 2027.
Guardianship
Public Advocate of David Malcolm Justice Centre, Level 23, 28 Barrack
Street, Perth, Western Australia is appointed limited guardian
represented person with the following functions:
(a) to decide where
the represented person is to live, whether permanently or temporarily; and
(b) to decide with whom the represented person is to live.
Tribunal approves delegation by the Public Advocate of her functions as guardian
of the represented person to an officer or employee
employed in the Office of
the Public Advocate.
of [address] is appointed limited guardian of the represented person with the
following functions:
(a) to make treatment decisions for the
represented person, subject to Division 3 of
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1990
(b) to determine the services to which the represented person should have
is declared that the represented person is not capable of making judgments for
the purpose of complying with the provisions of
Electoral Act 1907
(WA) relating to compulsory voting.
guardianship order is to be reviewed before 11 September
GAA 3993/2025
On an application by [R] pursuant to
Guardianship and
Administration Act 1990
(WA) concerning an enduring power of guardianship
dated 15 October 2024 by which [C] appointed [R] as her enduring guardian.
The Tribunal orders:
enduring power of guardianship dated 15 October 2024 by which the represented
party appointed [R] to be their guardian, is revoked.
I certify that the preceding paragraph(s)
comprise the reasons for decision of the State Administrative Tribunal.
MS K Lang, MEMBER
16 OCTOBER 2025
43(1)(a), (b) and
GA Act, s 68
Tribunal dated 23 December 2023 '[t]his letter is written for the purpose of the
State Administrative Tribunal and [disability
accommodation provider] to
keep on record ... [disabled son] in time is due to inherit my family home
[address] and possibly a Trust
agreed she dated the contract 6 March 2025 by mistake. The correct date is 3
June 2025 as stated next to the builder's
submissions filed on 5 September
submissions filed on 4 September
point R sought to withdraw the applications; leave was refused as I did not
consider this to be in C's best interests.
I made an emergency order pursuant
to s 65 of the GA Act to secure C's estate. The order appointed the Public
Trustee and authorised
the exercise of the functions of a plenary administrator.
R was directed not to act under the EPA until further order of the
Letter to Tribunal dated 23 December
44(5) of the GA Act provides that the Public Advocate may only be appointed as
guardian of the represented person where there
is no other person who is
suitable and willing to act.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (334 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter