URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WAGAB/2005/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:03:22
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Re HMG [2005] WAGAB 2 (14 January 2005)
GUARDIANSHIP AND ADMINISTRATION BOARD
HUMAN RIGHTS
GUARDIANSHIP AND ADMINISTRATION ACT 1990
[2005] WAGAB 2
(DEPUTY PRESIDENT)
MR J JAMES (MEMBER)
MS R CARROLL (MEMBER)
1 JULY 2004
DELIVERED :
14 JANUARY 2005
FILE NO/S :
BA 230 of 2004
PASSING OF ACCOUNTS
Catchwords:
Guardianship and Administration Passing of accounts Work performed by
family members Turns on its own facts
Legislation:
Guardianship and Administration Act 1990
Representation:
Applicant : N/A
Solicitors:
Applicant : N/A
Case(s) referred to in
decision(s):
Case(s) also cited:
DETERMINATION OF
1 These are reasons of the Board following the
taking of accounts in relation to the estate of HMG, the represented person, as
by AE. AE is the daughter of the represented person and was formerly
plenary administrator of her estate.
2 By an order of the Board dated 11 September 2003 AE was ordered to file
accounts for the period from 14 November 2001 to 30 June
2003 within 21 days. By
way of an order dated 4 December 2003 and then amended on 8 December 2003 and on
12 February 2004 AE's appointment
was revoked and Perpetual Trustees WA Limited
appointed in her place. AE was ordered to file accounts for the period 1 July
to 4 December 2003. On 14 November 2003 the Board received from AE accounts
for the period from 14 November 2001 to 30 June 2003
verified by an affidavit
sworn 13 November 2003. Following the filing of the accounts a number of queries
were raised by the Board's
Estate Management section. Due to the failure of AE
to deal with those queries to the satisfaction of the Board the matter was
on before the Board for the formal examination of the accounts. The
Board heard the matter on 1 July 2004. These reasons relate to
those accounts.
3 At the commencement of the hearing AE's counsel raised an issue as to the
basis upon which this matter had come before the Board.
The notice advising the
parties as to the Board's intention to examine the accounts dated 16 April 2004
stated that the matter was
proceeding on the initiative of the Board pursuant to
Guardianship and Administration Act 1990
provides as follows:
(1) The Board may at any time –
own motion; or
(b) on the application of –
(i) a represented person or a guardian or an administrator, or
ii) a person to whom leave has been granted under
review a guardianship order or an administration order
(2) The eligibility of a guardian or administrator to apply under subsection
(1)(b)(i) is limited to the guardianship or administration
order under which he
4 It was submitted by counsel for AE that
the examination of the accounts was not competent under
as that section is
limited to a Board review of a guardianship or administration order. We accept
of the Act has no application in this situation. The matter in fact
came before the Board as an examination of accounts pursuant
Act and r.1(3)(b). Whilst we accept that the reference to
in the notice
sent to the parties was incorrect, nothing turned on that. The notice made it
clear as to the nature of the hearing
and counsel for AE conceded that his
client was not taken by surprise in any way.
5 Before dealing with individual items in the accounts it is appropriate to
say something as to the way in which the hearing proceeded.
R.1(2) requires
accounts to be lodged "with vouchers for the payment of all disbursements and
where the vouchers are numerous they
must be marked with the corresponding
number in the account." Pursuant to r.1(3)
"The Board shall examine the accounts and vouchers so lodged and may–
(a) without attendance by the Administrator, allow them;
(b) require the Administrator to attend at a time and place specified and
furnish such books, accounts and other information as
6 The onus is on the administrator,
which includes a former administrator such as AE, to provide vouchers and the
like in relation
to all disbursements claimed in the accounts. In the absence of
a voucher or other proof in relation to a particular disbursement
or an adequate
explanation for the absence of a voucher then the person who has lodged the
accounts runs the risk of that disbursement
being disallowed.
provides in this respect that upon the examination of an account the Board may:
(a) allow them
(b) disallow any amount paid;
(c) determine that any amount or asset has been omitted, or than any loss has
7 Consistent with
this approach counsel for AE said the following at the hearing: (transcript p.9)
MR P: The queries. I'm going to response (sic) to each one, and if I can't
respond – I can say to you that I have advised my
client that if we can't
give an adequate answer and we cannot give an adequate explanation, then
it’s my view that these monies
should be paid back to the estate. It's as
simple as that. That's my advice to my clients.
THE PRESIDING MEMBER: All right.
MR P: So, you know, if I can't - I mean there's one for – a receipt for
repair of a violin. You have either got the receipt
or you haven't got the
receipt. The receipt for the camera. Well, if you feel the camera wasn't proper
and the camera – then
we will pay that money back, and that's what I'm
here to do."
8 That in our view was a quite proper
approach for AE to have taken. It is the approach that we have taken in relation
to the passing
of the accounts.
9 A recurring theme at the hearing was the difficulty AE had in locating
supporting documents. We were told that documents relating
to the administration
of the estate by AE are in storage. It seems that AE and her husband sold their
house and then, because of
the pressure of meeting an early settlement date, had
to pack their belongings, which included documents in relation to the estate,
very quickly. AE said in the course of the hearing (transcript p.13):
"There's too many boxes and where to start to look, I have no idea, because we
were asked if we would make early settlement available
for the people who bought
the property. Everything was thrown in together. We got out in one heck of a
hurry and I have not idea
where everything is. No
10 It was said by AE's husband that there
are approximately 500 boxes which are unmarked.
11 We do not accept that the fact that the vouchers are in storage and that
locating them would be an onerous task is a proper excuse
for AE's failure to
provide them to the Board with the accounts. As administrator of her mother's
estate AE was obliged to keep proper
records at the time and then to ensure that
those records did not become lost or unable to be
This is a different situation to that of an administrator who satisfies the
Board that vouchers have, for example, been stolen
or destroyed in a fire. AE
knows in general terms where the vouchers are located but has not, it appears,
sought to recover them.
She must bear the consequences of her inability to
produce vouchers in these circumstances.
12 A further issue that arose on a number of
occasions in the course of the hearing concerned the indication given by counsel
AE that she would, following the hearing, endeavour to provide the Board
with additional vouchers in relation to particular items.
The indication given
by counsel for AE was that if these additional documents were not provided in
the agreed period, then the Board
would be entitled to proceed to deal with the
matter without them. The following exchange appears at p.73 of the transcript:
MS C: No. In the absence of the information – is your submission that any
amounts for which vouchers can't be provided in the
time stipulated that the
) should disallow those amounts and they will be repaid to the
..........................
MR P: What I'm saying is, yes, that if I'm unable to satisfy you with – or
to take it beyond where I've taken those items today,
then I understand there
will be consequences and I can tell my client what those consequences
potentially are from your side. But
if I can't take those matters any further in
the next 14 days, then the board (
) will make its
13 By letter dated 19 July 2004 the Board
received various materials from AE's solicitors, Paiker & Overmeire.
Included in those
materials was a bundle of cheque butts and invoices said to
have been retrieved by AE. It is difficult to tell which of these documents,
some of which were photocopied on both sides and of poor quality, relate to
which particular items in the accounts and what their
effect is said to be. In
light of that the Acting Executive Officer of the Board wrote to Paiker &
Overmeire by letter dated
16 August 2004 asking that the Board be provided with
a fresh set of the documents within 7 days and that the Board be advised of
entry or entries in the accounts to which the documents relate and what the
documents purport to establish. AE has not complied
with that request.
14 AE's failure to provide vouchers in an acceptable form is unfortunate. We
have endeavoured to understand the documents provided
despite the difficulties referred to above. Again though, AE must bear
the consequences of any difficulties encountered in this respect.
The onus is
upon her to provide the accounts and supporting vouchers to the Board in an
acceptable form.
15 Finally in this respect, we note that AE has provided
to the Board a number of photocopies of cheque butts which she relies upon.
Whilst we refer throughout these reasons to those cheque butts, they are of
limited value for two reasons. First, in a number of
cases the amount of the
cheque is said to be made up of a number of different amounts that in turn
relate to different items in the
accounts. The butts do not however break down
the total amount of the cheque into those discrete amounts. For example, cheque
000001 dated 9 April 2003 in the sum of $5655 is noted on the butt as being
for "camera clothes shoes". It seems from matters raised
at the hearing that the
cheque is also said to cover monies paid in relation to a waste disposal system
and a hot water system. As
such not only is the description on the butt
incomplete but it is not clear what part of the cheque relates to which item of
expenditure.
Second, and more importantly, the butts, having been completed by
AE, are not an independent record of a liability to make a payment
nor a receipt
for a payment made. This is particularly concerning where one would expect such
documents to exist and to be provided.
16 We turn now to examine individual items in the accounts. By way of
explanation, the hearing proceeded by reference to issues raised
by the Board's
Manager, Estate Management, in a letter to AE's accountant dated 27 November
2003. In the hearing the Board went through
each item raised in the letter in
turn and counsel for AE made submissions based on those matters. AE's counsel
referred to and relied
upon correspondence from AE's accountant PW to Paiker
& Overmeire, an amended version of which, dated 1 July 2004, was provided
the Board. In these reasons we refer to that document as "PW's letter". Finally,
in these reasons we only deal with those items
where an amount is
disallowed.
"Personal Maintenance"
17 Item 1 on abstract 2 of the accounts shows an amount of $6721.43 expended
in relation to the represented person's personal maintenance.
The supporting
documentation provided with the accounts totals only the sum of $1524. A
breakdown of the sum of $6721.43 is provided
in PW's letter.
18 It seems that the expenditure in question was made from the represented
person's cheque account and comprised expenditure by the
represented person and expenditure by AE on the represented person's
behalf. Dealing first with expenditure by the represented person,
according to
AE, the represented person had a cheque book which allowed her to operate her
account even after AE's appointment as
administrator. According to a breakdown
of this expenditure in PW's letter, an amount of $274.38 was spent by the
represented person
either in this way or by way of a cash withdrawal by her. AE
says that she does not have any vouchers in respect of the expenditure
mother. We accept AE's explanation for her inability to provide vouchers for
this amount. We allow the sum of $274.38.
19 The balance of $6447.05 set
out in PW's letter relates to expenditure by AE on behalf of her mother. We
comment on this as follows:
1. There are vouchers in respect of the sum of $738 paid to Queens Park
Community Care and Swan Community Care. We allow that amount.
2. There are no vouchers in relation to a Telstra account in the sum of $95.65
other than a copy of a cheque butt dated 21 December
2001 for cheque number
000302 payable to Telstra in the sum of $95.96 (as opposed to $95.65). In the
absence of the relevant Telstra
account we disallow this amount. It is not
possible to determine whether it was the represented person's account that was
being paid.
3. An amount appears for "care Mrs H Gray" in the sum of $155.40. There is no
voucher for that sum though PW's letter states that
this sum was paid as part of
cheque 000311. According to the cheque butt dated 3 July 2002 that was a cheque
payable to AE in the
sum of $9000 for "legal fees". In the absence of a proper
voucher we do not allow that sum.
4. PW's letter refers to an amount of $1500 which is said to be "30 weeks at $50
per week (on average) cash spending money for Mrs
H Gray". There is no voucher
for this. AE's evidence at the hearing was unclear. She appeared at one stage to
suggest that she ensured
that her mother always had $50 to $70 cash and would
then reimburse herself from time to time from her mother's account. She also
said, however, that she took money from her mother's account which she kept in
safe place and would use to make regular payments
to her mother. Despite this
uncertainty, we allow this amount on the basis that one would not expect there
to be a voucher in this situation.
5. The amount of $1753 is claimed by way of reimbursement of AE for "clothes
shoes and ongoing expenses". According to PW's letter
this sum was paid to AE as
part of cheque 000001. The cheque butt dated 9 April 2003 is in the sum of $5655
and is noted as being
paid to AE for "camera clothes shoes". We deal with the
camera later in these reasons but simply note in the meantime that according
the accounts it cost $2348. It is also suggested in PW's letter that additional
amounts of $644 and $640 in relation to a waste
disposal unit and a hot water
system respectively were also paid out of cheque 000001. We also deal with these
items later in these
reasons. That leaves a balance of $2023 in relation to
cheque 000001 that should be vouched.
Some vouchers were provided to the Board in relation to purchases by AE for her
mother. Further vouchers, some of which were copies
of those provided with the
accounts, were among the documents provided to the Board by AE’s
solicitors following the hearing.
The vouchers are poor photocopies but at best
we can tell they add up to $1302.74. We do not understand how the amount of
out in PW's letter has been arrived at or how the balance of cheque
000001 is accounted for.
We would allow the sum of $1302.74 and disallow the sum of $720.26, being the
difference between the amount allowed of $1302.74 and
the balance of cheque
000001 of $2023.
6. Finally, there is an amount of $2205 which is said to be the amount paid to
AV, the represented person's granddaughter for looking
after the represented
person for 40 days. In the additional documents provided to the Board following
the hearing there is a cheque
butt dated 9 April 2003 numbered 000330 that
records an amount paid to AV for "care for Mum - period 27 Sept 02 to 3 April
days special care and assistance". A handwritten note on the page
containing the copy of the butt states "30 Thursdays 10 Sat/Sun
approx $55 per
According to AE's evidence, her daughter is a qualified aged care worker. She
needed a lot of support and
care. There is no other voucher for this substantial amount.
The fact that the work in question was carried out by a family member does not
mean that there should be no voucher. Once family
members charge substantial
amounts for work performed for a represented person the transaction becomes
commercial in nature. Whilst
there may not be an account, there is no reason why
there should not be a receipt for the monies paid to the family member. There
should also be a record that sets out exactly what was done, the amount charged
and how that amount was calculated. A satisfactory
explanation should also be
forthcoming as to exactly why the work was required to be done for the
represented person. In the absence
of such the administrator risks the
disallowance of the amount.
We disallow the amount of $2205. It is a substantial amount for which there are
no vouchers such as a receipt from AV. The only record
is that on the cheque
butt. It is not clear why the represented person needed to be cared for over the
relevant period by a qualified
health care worker nor what was actually done by
AV in that capacity. Finally, we note that the cheque butt refers to 40 days
and a daily rate of "approx $55 per day" that totals the sum of $2200. The
difference between that sum and the amount claimed is
only $5.00 but it means
that it is simply not clear how the amount of $2205 is arrived at. The use of an
approximate daily rate is
unsatisfactory.
follows that we disallow the sum of $3176.31 in respect of personal
maintenance.
Property Expenses
21 The amount of $3241.80 appears in the accounts under the heading "property
expenses : (including rates, taxes, insurance, repairs
etc.) Repairs,
maintenance and service". A further sum of $456.50 is claimed in the accounts in
relation to a security door. The
total amount claimed is therefore $3698.30. The
bulk of these expenses relate to a transportable home that was formerly on AE's
There is a breakdown of the sum of $3241.80 in PW's letter.
22 According to AE, an agreement had been reached with her
mother and her aunt LR in or about 1993 or 1994 to the effect that her
and LR would buy a transportable home that would be put on AE's property in
Caversham. Upon the represented person and LR
dying or going into aged care the
transportable home would pass to AE and her husband. This agreement was not put
into writing. AE
said that because the represented person and LR left the
Caversham property title to the transportable home had passed to her and
husband. The Caversham property has since been sold along with the transportable
has, we were told, commenced
proceedings claiming an interest in the proceeds of the sale of either the
transportable home or the
Caversham property itself. We were also told that no
claim is made in that respect by the represented person.
23 For the purposes of considering the accounts it is not necessary for us to
determine the nature of the represented person's interest
in the transportable
agreement, there is no basis for the
represented person to be paying for
expenses associated with the transportable home once it passed to AE and her
husband. It is necessary
therefore to fix the date when, upon AE's version of
events, property in the transportable home passed to her and her husband and
represented person ceased to be liable for any costs in relation to it. The
relevant date in this respect appears to be 20 March
2002. We say that for the
following reasons. The circumstances in which the represented person and LR left
the property has been
raised in previous proceedings before the Board. We note
that in a statutory declaration dated 18 June 2003 Heather Watson, a solicitor,
stated that she was present on 20 March 2002 when the represented person and LR
left the property. Similarly, AE, in a letter to
various persons received by the
Board on 16 April 2002 (p.8), refers to them leaving the property on that date.
That this is the
relevant date was confirmed by the position adopted by AE in
relation to the security door that cost $456.50. This is referred to
letter. According to AE this was ordered for the transportable home prior to the
represented person and LR leaving the property
but was not installed until after
they had left the property (transcript p.42). Cheque butt 000306 indicates that
this amount was
paid on 4 April 2002. AE's position, as put by her counsel at
the hearing, is that this amount should be repaid as it was incurred
represented person and AE had left the property.
24 We are satisfied therefore that on AE's version of events, property in the
transportable home passed to her and her husband on
20 March 2002
and that the represented person is not responsible for any costs
associated with the transportable home thereafter.
25 Much of the property expenses relate to a biomax
waste disposal unit which had to be serviced every three months according to AE.
Based upon the breakdown contained in PW's letter, which seems in turn to be
based upon cheque butts, the amount referrable to the
biomax is $1351.60. The
only vouchers provided in support of this expenditure for the relevant period
that expressly refer to the
bioxmax are copies of two accounts dated 28 January
2003 and 6 May 2003 in respect of which amounts of $93.70 and $181.80 were paid
respectively, and copies of various cheque butts. There is a butt numbered
000304 dated 8 March 2003 that notes a repayment to EA's
daughter of $88.20 in
respect of a biomax service. There is a butt numbered 000313 dated 15 October
2002 in largely the same terms
but in the sum of $87.20. Finally, there is a
butt numbered 000320 dated 3 February 2003 payable again to EA's daughter of
$181.80 relates to the biomax. These payments were all made after 20 March
2002 and cannot be allowed.
26 PW's letter refers to additional cheque butts which are said to relate to
the biomax however none of the butts actually refer to
the biomax. Cheque butt
000303 dated 25 January 2002 in the amount of $177.30 is said to be for
servicing the biomax. The butt is
difficult to read but does not appear to refer
to the biomax. Cheque butt 000311 dated 3 July 2002 in the amount of $9000 is
to include amounts of $79.40 and $93.70 for the biomax. We note however
that the cheque is said to be for "legal fees". Finally,
cheque butt 000001
dated 9 April 2003 in the sum of $5655 is said to include an amount of $644 for
replacing the pump on the biomax.
That butt refers to "camera clothes and
shoes". According to PW's letter further documentation in relation to the biomax
away and not available at this time". These amounts are disallowed as
not being vouched and, save for the amount of $177.30, as having
been incurred
after 20 March 2002.
27 It follows that the amount of $1351.60 is disallowed.
28 Of the remaining "property expenses", two relate to payments made to AE
for packing, cleaning and garden maintenance in the sum
of $1000 and to AE's
daughter for packing and cleaning in the sum of $250.20. As was conceded by
counsel for AE, these are not property
expenses but general disbursements from
the represented person's account. There were no vouchers for either of these
items other
than cheque butts 000317 dated 19 December 2002 in the sum of $1584,
part of which relates to "packing
cleaning garden
maintenance" and 000320 dated 3 February 2003, part of which relates to "packing
and cleaning" and is noted as being
paid to AE's daughter.
29 It is not
clear how either of these amounts were arrived nor as to the nature of the work
performed, when it was performed and
at what hourly rate. One must bear in mind
that the amount of $1250.20 is a substantial amount of money. We have already
the need for vouchers and for proper records where work is performed by
family members for a represented person.
30 In the absence of such records we disallow the amounts of $1000 and
31 There is a further amount claimed in the sum of $640 to replace a hot
water system in the transportable home. There is no voucher
for that. In PW's
letter it is said that this amount was paid as part of cheque 000001. As we have
already said, that butt is dated
9 April 2003 and refers to "camera clothes
shoes". There is no reference to a hot water system. There is no proof of this
we would disallow it. Even if there were proof, it appears to have been
incurred after 20 March 2002. We disallow the sum of $640.
32 Finally, an amount is claimed in respect of the security door in the sum
of $456.50. As indicated above, the door was installed
after 20 March 2002 and
is disallowed.
33 It follows that we disallow the sum of $3698.30 in respect of property
34 The sum of $20,900 is set out in the accounts as a loan by the represented
person to LAH, another of AE's daughters. In abstract
3 of the accounts the loan
is described as being at call and interest bearing. It appears from evidence
given at the hearing that
AE would give LAH monies as and when she needed them.
LAH's husband was unemployed at the time. AE said that she spoke to her mother
and asked if she would be prepared to "help" LAH. The represented person agreed
to do so. Thereafter on a regular basis between approximately
April 2002 and
March 2003 amounts usually of $1000 were taken from the represented person's
account and given to LAH. No written
loan agreement was entered into and nor it
seems was any rate of interest agreed. Though it is
the accounts that the loan was repayable at call it is not clear whether that
was ever agreed.
35 At the hearing there was an acceptance on the
part of AE's counsel that this money must be repaid, the only issue being as to
it should attract interest and if so, at what rate? That is our view as
well. In the absence of any evidence as to the terms on which
the money was paid
over we are not satisfied that it was in fact a loan. Whilst it may be that the
represented person was willing
to assist her granddaughter, she was at that time
incapable of making decisions as to her financial affairs. The decision to give
the money to LAH was in reality AE's decision. If a loan was to be made to LAH
the obligation was upon her as administrator to agree
the terms of the loan on a
commercial basis and in particular, whether it was repayable on a particular
date or on demand and as
to the interest rate that the loan attracted. These
were not agreed.
36 We are not satisfied that it is appropriate to categorise the transaction
as a loan. We consider it be closer to "a payment or
disposition of a
charitable, benevolent or ex gratia nature" which may not be made by an
administrator without the approval of the
Board - see
37 The amount of $20,900 is disallowed and must be repaid.
38 The accounts refer to a loan by the represented person to AE in the sum of
$15,000. Again, abstract 3 refers to this being on call
and interest bearing. In
the course of the hearing counsel for AE advised the Board that this amount
would be repaid. In light of
that little information was obtained from AE as to
the circumstances in which the loan was made and as to its terms.
39 Following the hearing, by letter dated 19 July 2004 AE's solicitors
advised the Board as follows:
"With regard to the "loans" to our client and her daughter we are instructed to
advise that the "loans" were agreed with our client's
mother and her aunt and
that our client would be entitled to $20,000 a year ($10,000 each) reimbursement
in properly caring for (the
represented person) and her sister (LR). Our client
did not draw on this entitlement on a regular basis and as such the "loans" were
nothing other than payments to our client resulting from this arrangement.
We are also instructed that the monies loaned to (AE) were loaned by our client
from monies to which she was properly entitled and
fully approved by (the
represented person)."
40 What immediately strikes us about this is that
if what AE says is correct, this was not a loan at all but simply a payment for
services rendered. It is not clear why the transaction is described as a loan in
the accounts and said to be payable on call and
interest bearing. Likewise, it
is described as a loan in PW's letter. AE had an opportunity to put this version
of events to the
Board at the hearing but did not do so even as her counsel
indicated quite clearly to the Board that it was a loan and would be repaid
(transcript p.49).
41 We are not satisfied as to the explanation put forward by AE in her
solicitor's letter of 19 July 2004 and do not accept that there
agreement of the nature suggested there. It seems that AE, as administrator of
her mother's estate, has received moneys from
her mother's estate without any
formal documentation of the advance and as to its terms, particularly as to
repayment and interest.
The obligations upon an administrator in these
circumstances are obvious. As with the "loan" to LAH, we consider this to be "a
or disposition of a charitable, benevolent or ex gratia nature" which
may not be made by an administrator without the approval of
42 We disallow the amount of $15,000 which must be repaid.
Legal Expenses
43 In abstract 2 of the accounts an amount of $26,270.11 is set out as
expenditure under the heading "Legal Expenses (incl. $825.00
R. Cannon)". It
appears from PW's letter than this item relates not simply to legal fees but to
his own fees also in the sum of $946.
So far as legal fees are concerned, they
relate to the costs of Leask & Co, Williams & Co and Ron Cannon. Copies
accounts, statements and cheque butts have been provided in relation
to this item. Unfortunately, and as with other items in the
accounts, the
vouchers are incomplete which has made our task difficult. According to PW's
letter, "there is supporting documentation
for the missing legal
.....expenditure. However (AE) has advised that the documentation is packed away
and not accessible at this
44 Two issues arise in relation to these legal fees, namely, the amount and
the work that was performed. This second point will bear
upon whether it was
appropriate for the fees to have been paid from the
represented person's estate. Dealing first with the amount of the
fees the following appears to be the case.
Leask & Co.
45 According to PW's letter, the amounts paid to Leask & Co totalled
$16,634 as follows:
Cheque 000307
Cheque 000311 (part)
Cheque 000312
Cheque 000327
46 The only Leask & Co account provided by AE with the accounts is a
final undated account in the sum of $4400. According to that
account, following
payment of $766 from trust an amount of $3634 remained due. That account was
sent with a covering letter dated
3 April 2003 and covers the period from 13
August 2002 to 14 March 2003. Further documents were provided following the
hearing principally
in the form of cheque butts. According to a butt dated 9
April 2002 and numbered 000307 the sum of $3000 was paid to Leask &
According to a butt dated 3 July 2002 and numbered 000311 an amount of $9000 was
paid to AE for "legal expenses". We can only
assume that that was paid to AE by
way of reimbursement of fees already paid by AE.
47 We note that WT says in his letter that of the amount of $9000, $6000
relates to the fees of Leask & Co. It is not clear as
to the basis upon
which he says that in the absence of supporting documentation. We note however
that according to PW's letter, cheque
000311 also relates to the fees of Ron
Cannon in the amount of $825, $155.40 for "care of (the represented person)",
$79.40 and $93.70
in respect of the biomax and $180 in relation to the fees of
Queens Park Community Centre, a total amount of $1333.50.
48 According to a butt numbered 000312 and dated 28 August 2002 an amount
$4000 was paid to AE in relation to "legal fees". Finally
by a cheque butt
numbered 000327 an amount was paid to Leask & Co in the sum of $3634, that
being the balance of the final account
referred to above. The total amount of
these cheque butts is $19,634.
49 The only other supporting document provided by AE is a copy of a
handwritten receipt from Leask & Co dated 9 April 2002 which
record the receipt from AE of an amount of cash in the sum
of either $1500 or $1520 and "cheques" in the sum of $3500 or $3520. The
on the receipt is hard to read. It is difficult to reconcile this receipt with
the payments referred to above.
50 Based on the cheque butts it seems that the sum
of $19,634 has been paid from AE's account by way of legal fees in the period
Leask & Co were acting, either by payments made directly to Leask &
Co or to AE, presumably by way of reimbursement of fees
paid directly by her.
That calculation includes the sum of $9000 that is the subject of cheque butt
000311. As we have said, PW in
his letter says that only $6000 of that sum
related to Leask & Co's fees and that part of the balance in the sum of
relates to other items of expenditure that we deal with elsewhere in
these reasons. The balance of $1666.50 remains unaccounted for.
In the absence
of any other explanation we think it reasonable to treat that sum as legal fees
as suggested by the butt. It follows
that the amount of legal fees in relation
to Leask & Co totals $18,300.50.
Williams & Co
51 Williams & Co appear to have been instructed by AE in late March or
early April 2003. According to cheque butt 000329 dated
7 April 2003 the sum of
$3000 was paid to Williams & Co in relation to legal fees. That is confirmed
by a receipt dated 9 April
2003. According to a statement dated 3 May 2003
Williams & Co rendered a bill dated 30 April 2003 in the sum of $5985.76
was then satisfied in part from the sum of $3000 held in trust. The
balance of $2985.76 was then paid by cheque 000002. According
to a statement
dated 4 June 2003 a further account was rendered on 30 May 2003 in the sum of
$1879.35. That was then paid by cheque
000010 dated 5 June 2003. We are
concerned only with payments made in the period to 30 June 2003 which total the
sum of $7865.11.
52 As indicated above, there is a reference in the accounts to an account of
"R Cannon" in the amount of $825.00. That account is
not in the papers provided
by AE with the accounts or in the papers provided thereafter. PW says in his
letter that this amount was
paid as part of cheque 000311. It is not clear as to
how PW is able to assert this.
53 In light of the matters set out above, it seems that the amount paid from
the represented person's account in respect of legal
fees, either by payment to
legal firms or to AE, totals $26,990.61.
54 Turning now to
the work performed by the lawyers, it is difficult to determine from the very
limited vouchers provided with the
accounts precisely what was done and for
whom. In light of this, following the hearing AE's solicitors wrote to Leask
Williams & Co by letters dated 7 July and 6 July 2004
respectively, detailing payments made to those firms and asking:
"Could you please advise us in writing as to whether these accounts were
provided for services provided to (AE) or whether these
accounts were rendered
in relation to services rendered to (the represented person)."
55 By their facsimile letter dated 12 July 2004
Leask & Co responded as follows:
"We refer to your fax of 7 July 2004.
We confirm that all the work undertaken for which accounts were rendered to (AE)
was undertaken on instructions from (AE), acting
in her capacity as
administrator of (the represented person), to protect the interests of (the
represented person).
We confirm that, although the services were provided to (AE), the accounts were
rendered in relation to services provided for the
benefit of (the represented
None of the work undertaken in respect of which the accounts were rendered
related to (AE's) personal interests. Further we consider
that the instructions
provided to us by (AE) and work undertaken as a result were appropriate in the
context of (AE's) role as (the
represented person's) administrator."
56 Williams & Co responded by facsimile letter
dated 8 July 2004 in the following terms:
"We refer to the above and thank you for your facsimile of 6 July 2004. Please
note that given the limited time remaining for the
relevant responses to the
Guardianship Board, the writer has not had the opportunity to consider the
remainder of this firm's file
(which is in archive storage).
With reference to your most recent facsimile, please note:
1. Payments detailed in your most recent facsimile were made in response to this
firm's invoices rendered to (AE),
as Administrator for the affairs of (the represented person).
2. Whilst (AE) instructed this firm, most (if not all) of the tasks undertaken
by this firm, related to the welfare of (the represented
person). For example,
the writer recalls the despite (AE) being her mother's Administrator, (the
represented person) had been relocated
to a sub-standard alleged Aged Care
Facility by third parties. By virtue of that relocation, the person with primary
responsibility
for the day to day supervision and welfare of (the represented
person) was the (represented person's) elder (96 year old) sister;
3. Not surprisingly, (AE) retained this firm to petition the Guardianship Board
for directions to compel immediate and radical improvements
in the standard of
care then being extended to her mother.
4. The Guardianship Board should be aware of the above, given the content of
(AE's) affidavits, including her affidavit of 14 July
5. In summary, although (AE) was this firm's previous instructor (on behalf of
her mother) no work was undertaken for (AE) personally
and (AE) did not (and
could not) profit or gain any personal advantage by advancing what she quite
properly regarded as the best
interests of her
of the Act provides as follows
in relation to the costs of parties in proceedings before the Board:
(1) Each party to any proceedings before the Board shall bear his own costs of
the proceedings except to the extent that provision
is otherwise made under
subsection (2), (3) or (4).
(2) Where a person gives evidence or information-
(a) at the instigation of the Board; or
(b) at the instigation of a party and the Board considers that the
circumstances are exceptional,
the Board may approve payment to him of such amount as it thinks fit in or
towards defraying any costs and expenses incurred by him
in doing so, and an
amount so approved shall be paid from moneys appropriated by Parliament for that
(3) Where in the opinion of the Board a party to proceedings has behaved
unreasonably, vexatiously or frivolously in relation to
the proceedings, the
Board may order that that party pay such costs as the Board thinks fit to any
other party who has not so behaved.
(4) The Board may, if it is satisfied that a party to proceedings has acted in
the best interests of the represented person or a
person in respect of whom an
application is made, order that such costs relative to those proceedings as the
Board thinks fit be
paid to that party by, or out of the assets of, that person.
(5) If any costs ordered by the Board to be paid by a party are not paid–
(a) the executive officer shall, upon application
made by the party entitled to such costs, grant to him a certificate specifying
the amount of such costs, and
(b) the party so entitled may recover the costs from the party against whom
the order was made as a debt due in a court of competent
58 It follows that the starting point is that a party must bear his or
her own costs in any proceedings before the Board. The Board
may however order
that a party's costs to be paid out of the estate of a represented person if
satisfied that the party has acted
in the best interests of the represented
person. In the event that the costs were incurred by AE in proceedings before
then they were not recoverable by her from her mother's estate unless
the Board had so ordered. The fact that she may at various
times have been the
administrator of her mother's estate would not matter.
59 In our view the costs incurred by AE for work performed by Leask & Co
and Williams & Co did relate to proceedings before
the Board. AE has been
involved in a number of applications before the Board in the
period that those firms were acting for her in the course of which
representatives of those firms corresponded with the Board and
appeared for her
or attended with counsel at hearings.
60 The very limited vouchers provided support this
conclusion. It appears from the Leask & Co account in the sum of $4400 that
the work covered by that account concerned proceedings before the Board.
Similarly, the letter from Williams & Co to AE dated
1 April 2003 with which
they provided AE with a costs agreement has a heading that refers to "WA
Guardianship and Administration
Board No 010444 in the matter of (the
represented person) Application Nos. AD 0411of 2001 and BA 0242 of 2002".
61 Finally, the letters from Leask & Co and Williams & Co dated 12
July and 8 July 2004 respectively, do nothing to change
this view. Williams
& Co's letter in particular makes it quite clear that that firm was acting
in proceedings before the Board.
There is nothing in Leask & Co's letter to
suggest that the work involved matters other than the proceedings before the
62 The Board has not made any order that these costs may be paid from the
represented person's estate and therefore the amount of
$18,300.50 in respect of
Leask & Co's fees and $7865.11 in respect of Williams & Co's fees are
disallowed.
63 This leaves the fees of Ron Cannon said by PW to be $825.00. It is clear
from the Board's files that he was in a different position
to Leask & Co and
Williams & Co as he was not instructed by AE but as counsel by solicitors
acting for LR and the represented
person, subject to her having capacity to
instruct a solicitor. However, in the absence of any vouchers in respect of the
fee of $825 we disallow that sum. It follows that the total amount
disallowed in respect of legal fees is $26,990.61.
The Restoration of the Violin
64 An amount of $1224 is claimed in the accounts for the restoration of a
violin. In the course of the hearing we were told by AE
that the violin in
question was a family heirloom. The represented person was very attached to it
and would talk about how her father
would play it. The violin was said to be
worth $150. AE had the violin restored because of its significance to her
mother. The cost
of the restoration was said by AE to be $1169 together with a
valuation fee of $55. It is now said to be worth $800.
In the course of the hearing there was dispute as to whether the violin actually
belonged to the represented person's sister. AE
was firmly of the view that it
belonged to her mother. For the purposes of dealing with the accounts we will
proceed on the basis
that the violin belonged to the represented person.
66 AE has not produced any vouchers in relation to the repair and valuation
of the violin. She said there is a receipt but she does
not know where it is.
She undertook to look for it. Her solicitors, in their letter to the Board dated
19 July 2004, advised the
Board that AE had been unable to locate a receipt.
67 In the absence of a receipt or even a cheque butt we would disallow this
item. Whilst we accept that there may be occasions where
an administrator may
for good reason by unable to produce a receipt for a particular item of
expenditure, there should still be some
record such as a cheque butt or if not,
an explanation given as to why none can be produced. As indicated earlier in
these reasons,
we find the explanation given by AE regarding such documents
being in storage very unsatisfactory.
68 We disallow the sum of $1224.
The Digital Camera
69 An amount of $2348 is set out in the accounts in relation to the purchase
of a digital camera. AE's solicitors in their letter
to the Board of 19 July
2004 advised that "we will not take this matter further." This was against the
background that in the course
of the hearing counsel for AE advised the Board
that AE would repay that sum.
70 For the record however, we indicate that it is our view that that sum
should be repaid. It was said by AE that the camera was purchased
so that the
represented person could have photographs of her grandchildren and family
generally. No vouchers were supplied in relation
to the camera other than a
cheque butt numbered 000001 in an amount of $5655 dated 9 April 2004 that refers
to "camera, clothes shoes"
and which is inadequate. Even if a proper voucher
were supplied we would not accept that the expenditure of such an amount on a
could be justified.
71 We disallow the sum of $2348.
72 The amount of $1244.95 is set out in the accounts in relation to "gifts
– birthdays, Christmas, etc".
of the Act provides:
(3) Notwithstanding this section or
, an administrator shall not
without the authority of the Board under
section 71(5)
(a) make a payment or disposition of a charitable,
benevolent or ex gratia nature; or
(b) make a payment in respect of a debt or demand that the represented person
is not obliged by law to pay.
74 AE informed the Board that she spent the amount of $1244.95 on
Christmas and birthday gifts that her mother would normally have
spent on her
family. She said she spoke to her mother who was happy to provide the gifts. No
vouchers were provided by AE who was
unable to say how the sum was calculated.
The precise amount claimed suggests that someone at some point must have had
information
which allowed the amount to calculated. There was some suggestion
that PW may have been provided with this information.
75 We would disallow the amount claimed in light of
of the Act. The
fact that AE may have obtained her mother's approval is irrelevant. We are also
conscious of the fact that AE is
unable to explain how the amount, which is not
insubstantial, is arrived at or provide any explanation for the absence of
76 We disallow the sum of $1244.95.
77 We disallow the amount of $74,582.17 in relation to the account calculated
as follows:
Personal maintenance -
Property expenses -
Loan – LAH -
Loan – AE -
Legal expenses -
Violin restoration -
Digital camera -
of the Rules of the Guardianship and Administration Board
provides as follows:
"If an Administrator makes default in bringing in his account or in having the
same passed or in paying the balance certified to
be due from him or in causing
the same or any sum of cash under his control to be laid out, paid, or received
pursuant to any certificate
or direction in that behalf, the Board may, unless
cause be shown to the contrary, disallow his salary or remuneration, if any, and
may also charge him with interest at a rate of not more than 14.5% yearly upon
any balance or cash for the time during which the
same appears to have been
improperly retained in hand or uninvested."
79 In our view and based upon the matters set out
above, AE has defaulted in bringing in the accounts and having them passed. It
that we may order that she pay interest on any amount "improperly
retained in hand or uninvested". It is also our view that the amounts
above constitute monies improperly retained by AE in hand or uninvested.
80 Whilst r.(8) refers to an amount of not more than 14.5%, we consider the
rate of 5% to be reasonable with such interest to commence
running on 30 June
2003, being the end of the accounting period.
I CERTIFY that this and the preceding twenty four pages
comprise the reasons for decision of the members who heard this matter.
Deputy President
Dated 14 January 2005
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (106 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter