URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/wa/WAIRC/2025/210.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:04:06
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Glenda Teede -v- Shire of Menzies [2025] WAIRC 210; (3 April 2025)
UNFAIR DISMISSAL
APPLICATION
WESTERN AUSTRALIAN INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COMMISSION
SENIOR COMMISSIONER R
TUESDAY, 18 MARCH 2025
DELIVERED :
THURSDAY, 3 APRIL 2025
U 116 OF 2024
GLENDA TEEDE
SHIRE OF MENZIES
Application for stay or adjournment of proceedings pending
finalisation of matter before the Supreme Court – Matters before
Commission and the Supreme Court are significantly
interrelated –Whether maintenance of both proceedings is an abuse of
process – Whether applicant approbates and reprobates in relation to
Commission’s jurisdiction – Whether grant
of stay is in public
interest – Inappropriate for the Commission to proceed while matter before
the Supreme Court – Stay
Legislation
Industrial Relations Act 1979
Local Government Act 1995
Stay application
Representation:
Mr D Coulter
Mr C Beetham
Solicitors:
Civic Legal
Case(s) referred to in reasons:
Association of Professional Engineers Scientists & Managers Aust v
Skilled Engineering Pty Ltd
(1994) 54 IR 236
Commonwealth v Verwayen
[1990] HCA 39; (1990) 95 ALR 321
Cooper v Darwin Rugby League Inc
(1994) 1 IRCR 130
Dadey v Edith Cowan University
(1996) 70 IR 295
De Pledge v Moulding Industries Pty Ltd
[2004] WAIRC 11157
Gilmore v Cecil Bros & Ors
(1996) 76 WAIG 1184
Hancock Prospecting Pty Ltd v DFD Rhodes Pty Ltd
[2020] WASCA 77
(2020) 386 ALR 632
[2012] WADC 124
; (2012) 79 SR 259
Insurance Commission of Western Australia v Woodings as Liquidator of the
Bell Group Ltd (In Liq) [No 2]
[2017] WASC 372
Kermani v Westpac Banking Corporation
[2012] VSCA 42
(2012) 36 VR
L & W Developments Pty Ltd v Della
[2003] NSWCA 140
(2003) 135 IR
Matthews v Cool or Cosy Pty Ltd & Anor
[2004] WASCA 114
Metropolitan (Perth) Passenger Transport Trust v Gersdorf
Mineralogy Pty Ltd v Sino Iron Pty Ltd
[2015] WASC 454
Mohazab v Dick Smith Electronics (No. 2) Pty Ltd
[1995] IRCA 625
(1995) 62 IR 200
Moore v Inglis
(1976) 9 ALR 509
Moylan v City of South Perth
[2006] WASC 262
(2006) 157 IR 441
Patrick Jebb atf The Trafalgar West Investments Trust v Superior Lawns
Australia Pty Ltd
[2019] WASC 121
Portolesi v Fini Group Management Pty Ltd
(1997) 77 WAIG 506
Scicluna v Brooks t/as Bayview Motel Esperance, WA
[2016] WAIRC 00862
(2016) 96 WAIG 1475
Shire of Esperance v Mouritz
(1991) 71 WAIG 891
Sterling Pharmaceuticals Pty Ltd v The Boots Company (Australia) Pty
[1992] FCA 71
; (1992) 34 FCR 287
The Undercliffe Nursing Home v The Federated Miscellaneous Workers’
Union of Australia, Hospital, Service and Miscellaneous
Thirteenth Corporation Pty Ltd v State
[2006] FCA 979
(2006) 232 ALR
United Australia Ltd v Barclays Bank Ltd
[1941] AC 1
[1940] 4 All
Reasons for Decision
applicant, Glenda Teede commenced a referral of an
unfair dismissal
application
in the Western Australian Industrial Relations
in which she seeks reinstatement to her position as Chief Executive Officer of
of Menzies. She now asks the Commission to adjourn, postpone or
stay her unfair dismissal application until other proceedings are
stay application
the form initiating Ms Teede’s unfair dismissal application says she was
told she was dismissed on 17 October 2024 with her
last day of employment
also being 17 October 2024. In the form, Ms Teede flagged that she intended to
apply to the Supreme Court
of Western Australia for judicial review of the
Shire’s decision to terminate her employment.
filing her unfair dismissal application, as foreshadowed, Ms Teede has now
commenced proceedings in the Supreme Court of Western
Australia in CIV 1202 of
2025 seeking judicial review of the Shire’
October 2024 decision
judicial review proceedings
the judicial review proceedings Ms Teede seeks a writ of certiorari in relation
to the Shire’s decision terminating Ms Teede’s
appointment as Shire
is no dispute that the Shire did make a decision, by resolution dated
17 October 2024, to terminate Ms Teede’s employment
as CEO: Form 2A
to Unfair Dismissal Application, Attachment 2.
the judicial review proceedings, Ms Teede alleges this decision was
invalid on grounds of:
(a) Breach of natural justice
due to a failure to afford her a fair hearing, bias, or both.
(b) The absence of evidence to justify the decision.
(c) The absence of power to make the decision in that:
i. The decision was not authorised by and was contrary to the
Government Act 1995
(WA) and its subsidiary legislation; or
ii. The jurisdictional facts necessary to enliven the power did not
(d) Failure to follow procedures required by law.
(e) Failure to take account of mandatory relevant considerations.
(f) Unreasonableness.
seeks orders quashing the decision and declaring the decision to be invalid and
of no force or effect.
Shire opposes Ms Teede’s stay application. It says that Ms Teede should
not be able to ‘park’ her unfair dismissal
application, while
maintaining other proceedings in which she asserts, in effect, that the
Commission does not have jurisdiction
because there has been no valid dismissal.
The Shire says to grant the stay application would amount to condoning
abuse of process.
contest is novel. Normally a respondent to proceedings might want to stay them
in circumstances where there are multiple actions
on foot or where it is alleged
that proceedings are an abuse of process. Here it is the applicant who seeks a
stay to allow the judicial
review proceedings to take their course, while the
respondent resists a stay of the unfair dismissal application and at the same
time rebukes the applicant’s conduct in commencing the unfair dismissal
application.
resolution of the stay application first requires consideration of whether I
have power to ‘stay’ the proceedings.
If I do, then I must decide
whether to exercise the discretion to grant the stay application. There are
several factors that are
relevant to the exercise of the discretion. Those which
are the focus in this matter are:
(a) Whether Ms Teede’s
conduct in maintaining the judicial review proceedings and this unfair dismissal
application amounts
to an abuse of process, such that the stay application
should be dismissed so as not to sanction the abuse.
(b) The effect of the judicial review proceedings on these proceedings.
(c) Avoiding multiple proceedings on similar issues.
(d) The advantages and disadvantages to Ms Teede and the Shire of a stay
being granted.
aside the question of whether there is power to make an order, as I understand
it, if Ms Teede’s conduct did not involve
an implicit denial of the
Commission’s jurisdiction, the merit of staying or adjourning these
proceedings so that interrelated
or common issues could be determined in the
judicial review proceedings first would be relatively uncontentious. There would
doubt that several factors relevant to such applications as set out in
Sterling Pharmaceuticals Pty Ltd v The Boots
Company (Australia) Pty Ltd
[1992] FCA 71
; (1992) 34 FCR 287
Sterling Pharmaceuticals
) would favour the grant of stay.
provokes the Shire’s opposition is the alleged inconsistency between Ms
Teede’s invocation of the Commission’s
dismissal application whilst simultaneously denying it in the judicial review
proceedings.
my view the Shire is mistaken to characterise Ms Teede’s position as
involving inconsistency. Much of the foundation for
its opposition to the
application therefore falls away.
is appropriate to stay these proceedings for the following
Does the Commission have power to temporarily stay
proceedings before it?
Shire puts the Commission’s power to make a temporary stay order in issue.
There are two ways the question as to whether
the Commission has power
first is that the
Industrial Relations
(WA) contains no
express power to ‘stay’ proceedings or to adjourn proceedings for an
indefinite duration.
permits the Commission to adjourn ‘to any time and place’
says the Commission may:
[G]enerally give all such
directions and do all such things as are necessary or expedient for the
expeditious and just hearing and
determination of the matter.
Shire acknowledges that the Commission has in the past stayed proceedings, for
example where related criminal proceedings are
pending: see
Portolesi v Fini Group Management Pty
(1997) 77 WAIG 506
at 507. The Commission has also stayed unfair
dismissal and denied contractual benefits proceedings where interrelated Supreme
proceedings were also on foot:
De Pledge v Moulding Industries Pty
[2004] WAIRC 11157
(2004) 84 WAIG 1195.
In those matters, it is
likely that the existence of the power was assumed, without there being a
binding finding of law that the
power exists.
Shire also concedes that an adjournment of the proceedings might, for practical
purposes, be in effect a stay. It says that the
power to adjourn the proceedings
is limited to the power to adjourn to ‘any time and place’ and
therefore, the power
to adjourn indefinitely or without specifying a particular
or definite point in time is precluded.
answer is simple. The adjournment Ms Teede is seeking is not of an indefinite
duration. She seeks an adjournment until the happening
of a definite event, that
is, the determination of the judicial review proceedings. The moment when the
judicial review proceedings
are determined is a ‘time’ for the
purpose of the power in
of the Act.
the event that the Shire is suggesting that
does not permit an
adjournment to a time determined by the happening of an event, but only to a
time expressed as a certain duration
or a fixed date and time, I reject that
suggestion.
word ‘any’ appearing before ‘time’ denies the ability to
read the power as limited in respect of the time
to which a matter is adjourned.
‘Any time’ means whatever and whichever time. By its ordinary
meaning, ‘any time’
can be a point or moment that is described as a
date, as well as a point or moment described by reference to the occurrence of
event. A narrower construction does no more than limit the form that an order
adjourning a matter can take. I cannot see any purpose
is served by a narrow
construction.
second way in which the question of the Commission’s power arises is if
the Commission lacks jurisdiction in relation to
Ms Teede’s unfair
dismissal application. For the Commission to have jurisdiction under
of the Act the employee, Ms Teede, must have been dismissed by the Shire.
Whether Ms Teede was dismissed by the Shire is a jurisdictional
fact which is
necessary for the Commission to exercise any of its powers under the Act.
Shire says that Ms Teede ‘says there’s been no dismissal, but also,
maybe there has been a dismissal’ (ts 7).
It says that if Ms Teede’s
case is that the Shire’s decision to terminate her employment was invalid,
then the Commission’s
if she invokes it as a matter of form, and therefore the Commission’s
powers are not engaged.
Act does not define what is a ‘dismissal’. But the concept is a
broad one. In
Metropolitan (Perth) Passenger Transport Trust v
(1981) 61 WAIG 611
Smith J said (at 616):
meaning attributed by the Shorter Oxford Dictionary to the verb "dismiss" is "to
send away or remove from office, employment,
or position." Speaking of the
meaning of the word "dismissal" in
Auckland Transport Board v Nunes
(1952) NZLR. 412
Fair J said at p 410:
The word "dismissal" may be used in a sense of a peremptory or arbitrary
dismissal or a dismissal after due notice or payment under
the terms of the
contract of employment.
Being qualified as the verb "dismissed" is in the context in which it appears
in s 29(2)(a) by the adverb "unfairly" it seems to me
that the subsection is
designed to apply to all dismissals, whether wrongful or lawful at common law.
To paraphrase the words of
Bray C J in his reasons for judgment in
Queen v. The Industrial Court of South Australia; ex parte General Motors
Holdens Pty Ltd
10 SASR 582
at p 586, a lawful dismissal on notice can,
I think, in appropriate circumstances be categorised as unfair, e.g. if
dismissed by
reason of his religious persuasion—conversely, some wrongful
dismissals, as when by excusable mistake a notice is given slightly
short of the
period specified in the contract of employment or at common law, might not
deserve that adjective.
is well established that ‘dismissal’ and ‘termination’
as those words appear in the unfair dismissal provisions
of the Act and federal
legislation in its various iterations from time to time have the same meaning.
That meaning is an act done
by an employer terminating or purporting to
terminate the employment:
Dadey v Edith Cowan
(1996) 70 IR 295
Association of Professional
Engineers, Scientists & Managers Australia v Skilled Engineering Pty
(1994) 54 IR 236
per Gray J;
Cooper v Darwin Rugby League
(1994) 1 IRCR 130
per Northrop J;
Mohazab v Dick Smith
Electronics (No. 2) Pty Ltd
[1995] IRCA 625
(1995) 62 IR 200
Matthews v Cool
or Cosy Pty Ltd & Anor
[2004] WASCA 114
(2004) 136 IR 156
Heenan J at [68].
or not there has been an act done by the employer terminating or purporting to
terminate the employment is a matter for evidence
in each case.
Teede’s challenge to the lawfulness and validity of the Shire’s
decision to dismiss her in the judicial review proceedings
does not amount to a
denial of the existence of a dismissal as a jurisdictional fact. It is not
inconsistent to maintain that there
was a ‘dismissal’ as a matter of
fact for the purpose of s 29(1)(c), whilst also denying the dismissal was valid
matter of law. Both propositions can be true.
light of the Shire’s concession that it made a decision by resolution to
terminate Ms Teede’s employment, there was
a dismissal by the Shire
enlivening the Commission’s jurisdiction. Ms Teede’s judicial review
application does not amount
to a denial that there was a dismissal in fact, or a
denial of the Commission’s jurisdiction.
Commission has jurisdiction in relation to Ms Teede’s unfair dismissal
application. I therefore have power to make the orders
Is Ms Teede’s conduct an abuse of process?
Shire submits that an abuse of process arises in two ways. One is the
approbation and reprobation of the Commission’s jurisdiction,
says is a collateral misuse of the Commission’s jurisdiction. As outlined
above, it says Ms Teede’s conduct
is simultaneously accepting and denying
that she was dismissed. For the preceding reasons at [25]-[30], I reject this
characterisation
of Ms Teede’s position.
other way the Shire submits that there is an abuse of process is by maintaining
two civil actions where one will lie, where the
issues overlap or significantly
overlap or there is a similarity of subject matters of the proceedings. The
Shire points out that
the issues in the unfair dismissal application and the
issues in the judicial review proceedings clearly do overlap substantially.
is not an abuse of process to seek relief in the alternative:
Commission of Western Australia v Woodings as Liquidator of the Bell Group Ltd
(In Liq) [No 2]
[2017] WASC 372
ICWA v Woodings
[83]. The Shire accepts that it is permissible to maintain inconsistent or
alternative claims, without that being an abuse of
process in and of itself.
J set out the relevant principles in
Jebb atf The Trafalgar West Investments Trust v Superior Lawns Australia Pty
[2019] WASC 121
). Relevant
extracts are reproduced below with citations omitted:
amounts to an abuse of the court's process is insusceptible of a formulation
comprising closed categories. It extends
to all categories of case in which the
processes and procedures of the court, which exist to administer justice with
fairness and
impartiality, may be converted into instruments of injustice or
unfairness. Abuse of process occurs in any circumstance in which
the court's procedures would be unjustifiably oppressive to a party or would
bring the administration of justice into
disrepute. However, the onus of
satisfying the court that there is an abuse of process is a heavy one.
Rogers v The Queen
McHugh J observed:
Although the categories of abuse of procedure remain open, abuses of
procedure usually fall into one of three categories: (1) the
court's procedures
are invoked for an illegitimate purpose; (2) the use of the court's procedures
is unjustifiably oppressive to
one of the parties; or (3) the use of the court's
procedures would bring the administration of justice into disrepute.
[104] Subsequently, in
Ridgeway v The Queen
, Gaudron J
referred to 'abuse of process' in terms that included within the concept the
notion of proceedings that are frivolous,
vexatious or oppressive.
[106] The doctrine of abuse of process is informed in part by considerations
of finality and fairness. The underlying public interest
is twofold: there
should be finality in litigation and a party should not be twice vexed in the
same matter. Thus abuse of process
may exist where a person seeks to re-litigate
an issue already decided. There is a general public interest in the same issue
being litigated over again. It has been said that it would be a 'scandal to
the administration of justice' if, a question having
been disposed of by one
case, the litigant were permitted to set up the case again by changing the form
of proceedings.
[107] For a step in a proceeding to amount to an abuse of process by
reason of impermissible re-litigation of a dispute it is not
necessary that one
of res judicata, issue estoppel or Anshun estoppel be applicable.
[111] Abuse of process may arise beyond the circumstance where a person
seeks to relitigate an issue already decided. There may
be an abuse of the
process of the court in seeking to litigate matters which could
and should have been litigated in earlier proceedings.
possibility was recognised by Lord Bingham in the House of Lords
Johnson v Gore Wood & Co
The bringing of a claim or the raising of a defence in later proceedings may,
without more, amount to abuse if the court is satisfied
... that the claim or
should have been raised
in the earlier proceedings if
it was to be raised at all. I would not accept that it is necessary, before
abuse may be found, to
identify any additional element such as a collateral
attack on a previous decision or some dishonesty, but where those elements are
present the later proceedings would be much more obviously abusive, and there
will rarely be a finding of abuse unless the later
proceeding involves what the
court regards as unjust harassment of a party.
It is, however, wrong to
hold that because a matter could have been raised in earlier proceedings it
should have been, so as to render
the raising of it in later proceedings
necessarily abusive. That is to adopt too dogmatic an approach to what should in
be a broad, merits-based judgment which takes account of the public
and private interests involved and also takes account of all
the facts of the
, focusing attention on the crucial question whether, in all the
circumstances, a party is misusing or abusing the process of the
seeking to raise before it the issue which could have been raised
[112] That aspect of the doctrine of abuse of process has been accepted by
various intermediate appellate courts in Australia including
the Court of
Appeal in Western Australia. It has also been expressly confirmed by four
members of the High Court in
Tomlinson v Ramsey Food Processing Pty
[I]t has been recognised that making a claim or raising an issue which was
made or raised and determined in an earlier proceeding,
or which ought
reasonably to have been made or raised for determination in that earlier
, can constitute an abuse of process even where the earlier
proceeding might not have given rise to an estoppel.
(original emphasis)
principles described at [111]-[112] above are encapsulated by the statement in
ICWA v Woodings
at [35] that it is prima facie vexatious to bring
two extant civil actions where one will lie, whether or not the proceedings are
in separate courts.
considering whether the rule should apply, consideration should be given to
whether there was reasonable justification for the
second proceeding based on
legitimate considerations of convenience, cost or the like:
Mineralogy Pty
Ltd v Sino Iron Pty Ltd
[2015] WASC 454
per Chaney J at [17] citing
Kermani v Westpac Banking Corporation
[2012] VSCA 42
(2012) 36 VR
Moore v Inglis
(1976) 9 ALR 509
Corporation Pty Ltd v State
[2006] FCA 979
(2006) 232 ALR 491.
cause of action estoppel or issue estoppel to apply, there must first be an
exercise of judicial power to determine the parties’
rights or resolve a
contested issue. That has not occurred. But as
indicates, it is not necessary to find that issue estoppel, cause of action
estoppel or Anshun estoppel applies, in order
to find there is an abuse of
Nevertheless,
the Shire relied on the principle, reflected in the statement of Lord Atkin in
United Australia Ltd v Barclays Bank Ltd
[1940] 4 All ER 20
United Australia v Barclays Bank
30, that if a person is entitled to one of two inconsistent rights, and if the
person has with knowledge done an unequivocal
act showing they have chosen one,
they cannot afterwards pursue the other. The Shire argued that upon delivery of
a judgment in the
Supreme Court, that election between inconsistent rights will
in effect have been made.
initially understood the Shire’s submission to be to that whichever action
proceeds to determination first, regardless of
the outcome of the determination,
Ms Teede will have been taken to have elected between the two inconsistent
rights. Had that been
the submission, it would be a misapplication of the
principle. The election is between the rights the alternative causes of action
seek to enforce: As Brennan J said in
Commonwealth v Verwayen
[1990] HCA 39; (1990) 95 ALR 321 at 340 (citations
Election consists in a choice between rights which the
person making the election knows he possesses and which are alternative and
inconsistent rights. A doctrine closely related to election, and sometimes
treated as a species of election, is the doctrine of approbation
reprobation. This doctrine precludes a person who has exercised a right from
exercising another right which is alternative to
and inconsistent with the right
he exercised as, for example, where a person “having accepted a benefit
given him by a judgment,
cannot allege the invalidity of the judgment which
conferred the benefit”. An election is binding on the party who makes it
once it is made overtly — or, at all events, not later than on the
communication of the election to the party or parties affected
thereby. It is
binding whether or not others who are affected by the election have acted in
reliance on it. In this respect, election
is to be distinguished from estoppel.
judgment which does not determine in favour of, and therefore give the benefit
of a right, does not preclude the pursuit of another
alternative right.
any event, it is not clear that the Shire was seeking to apply the principle in
this way. It later submitted that what Ms Teede
ought to have done, is to await
the outcome of the judicial review proceedings, and then, if the decision is
against her, at that
point make an application to bring an out of time unfair
dismissal application to the Commission, at which point the Commission would
need to determine whether an issue estoppel and/or res judicata prevents her
from doing so. In making that submission, the Shire
effectively conceded that
Lord Atkin’s principle did not preclude the maintenance of a second
alternative clause of action
after judgment in one cause of action, per se.
reveals the difficulty with the Shire’s objection. Ms Teede’s
alternative claims do not meet the threshold condition.
They cannot be
determined by a single proceeding. The Commission could not review the
Shire’s decision, quash it or make a
declaration that the decision is
invalid. If the Commission determines that a dismissal is harsh, oppressive or
unfair it may make
the orders set out in s 23A of the Act: for reinstatement,
reemployment and for compensation for remuneration lost, or for loss or
caused by the dismissal.
the other hand, Ms Teede could not pursue a claim for compensation for loss or
injury caused by an unfair dismissal by way of judicial
cannot be said that Ms Teede’s alternative causes of action could have
been pressed by a single proceeding, let alone that
she should have commenced
only one proceeding. This is not a case where one civil action lies. There is
therefore no prima facie
abuse of process. Ms Teede has legitimately taken the
course of pursing alternative claims within the limits of the jurisdiction
the Supreme Court and the Commission respectively.
Teede’s strategy does not undermine the administration of justice, nor
does it involve any improper purpose. Her strategy
does not infringe the public
interest in the finality of litigation. As there is no abuse of process involved
in the maintenance
of her two alternative causes of action at this point, the
fact she does so is not a factor weighing against the grant of her stay
application.
Shire has failed to establish that the two proceedings involve effectively
identical claims or inconsistent rights. While it is
fair to characterise both
claims as commonly founded on a denial of procedural fairness, and therefore
having essentially the same
factual substrata, the criteria for relief, and the
relief itself, is not identical.
Other factors in exercising the
discretion to adjourn the proceedings
relevant factors in determining whether to stay proceedings are set out in
Sterling Pharmaceuticals
L & W Developments Pty
Ltd v Della
[2003] NSWCA 140
(2003) 135 IR 118
Pharmaceuticals
being applied in
Hancock Prospecting Pty Ltd v DFD
Rhodes Pty Ltd
[2020] WASCA 77
(2020) 386 ALR 632
. The factors
Sterling Pharmaceuticals
(at 290-291) are set out in the
following extract:
The court has a general power to control its own
proceedings, and that power extends to enable it to order a temporary stay of
proceedings
in various circumstances including the case where proceedings are
pending in another court and it is desirable that those proceedings
proceed to their conclusion first.
In my opinion relevant considerations to be taken into account in the present
case include the following:
• Which proceeding was commenced first.
• Whether the termination of one proceeding is likely to have a
material effect on the other.
• The public interest.
undesirability of two courts competing to see which of them determines common
facts first.
• Consideration of circumstances relating to
Whether work
done on pleadings, particulars, discovery, interrogatories and preparation might
undesirability of substantial waste of time and effort if it becomes a common
practice to bring actions in two courts involving
substantially the same
• How far advanced the proceedings are in each
The law should
strive against permitting multiplicity of proceedings in relation to similar
• Generally balancing the advantages and disadvantages
to each party.
The impact of the judicial review proceedings and the unfair dismissal
application on each other
support its case that the two proceedings should be treated as identical claims,
the Shire argued that whatever the outcome of
the judicial review proceedings
might be, the maintenance of the unfair dismissal application will be an abuse
(a) If the judicial review proceedings succeed, Ms Teede
must then be taken to have elected between her alternative causes of action,
is estopped from pursuing the unfair dismissal application. The Commission is
without jurisdiction as there has been no dismissal.
(b) If the judicial review proceedings fail, the dismissal decision is valid
but the essential issues of fact and law will have been
determined giving rise
to issue estoppel.
the Shire, the consequence of this position should be a finding that the
maintenance of both proceedings is an abuse of process,
but a stay should be
set out above, I do not agree there is an abuse of process. But the impact of
determinations made in one proceeding for the other
proceeding is relevant to
whether a stay should be granted.
Teede has not expressly conceded that an order quashing or declaring invalid the
dismissal in the judicial review proceedings will
give rise to cause of action
estoppel, although she does say that it will mean that it will be ‘a moot
point deciding whether
the decision was unfair as a matter of industrial
law’ (stay application, pg 5) and that such a result would avoid the need
to continue with the unfair dismissal application.
this point, I agree with the Shire. An outcome in the judicial review
proceedings which declares the dismissal to be invalid would
prevent Ms Teede
from continuing with the unfair dismissal application. Even if the Commission
had jurisdiction, none of its s 23A
powers of reinstatement, re-employment, or
compensation would be available. Ms Teede’s success in the judicial review
proceedings
would constitute an election as between her alternative causes of
[2012] WADC 124
(2012) 79 SR 259 at [108];
United Australia v Barclays Bank
if the judicial review proceedings do not determine that the dismissal was
invalid? Ms Teede does not concede that the judicial
review proceedings will
necessarily give rise to issue estoppel. It is unclear whether Ms Teede accepts
that the judicial review
proceedings may result in findings that give rise to an
issue estoppel. Her counsel submitted that it is premature to determine whether
and how an estoppel might arise, but the possibility of estoppel arising is a
good reason to stay these proceedings.
Shire argued that if the judicial review proceedings fail, and the Supreme Court
were to find that the termination of Ms Teede’s
employment was valid then
it must follow that there was no denial of procedural fairness. Such a finding
would bind the Commission,
and be fatal to the unfair dismissal claim.
issues in the two proceedings significantly overlap. Ms Teede relies on grounds
that relate to denial of procedural fairness both
for the purpose of her
judicial review proceedings, and to demonstrate that the dismissal was unfair.
judicial review proceedings will not necessarily have the exhaustive effect the
Shire described though. A lawful dismissal can
be harsh, oppressive or unfair:
Scicluna v Brooks t/as Bayview Motel
Esperance, WA
[2016] WAIRC 00862
(2016) 96 WAIG 1475
question of whether the Shire had a statutory obligation to afford Ms Teede
procedural fairness for the purpose of the validity
of its decision is different
to the question of whether a denial of procedural fairness generally renders a
dismissal unfair for
the purpose of s 29(1)(c). For the latter purpose, a denial
of procedural fairness is but one factor in determining whether a dismissal
harsh, oppressive or unfair, but in some cases, may be a most important
circumstance:
Shire of Esperance v Mouritz
(1991) 71 WAIG 891.
Further, the manner of the dismissal may render it
unfair even without constituting a denial of procedural fairness:
v Cecil Bros & Ors
(1996) 76 WAIG 1184.
the judicial review proceedings might fail on grounds that the decision is not
amenable to judicial review, without there
being any findings about procedural
fairness. Or the relief sought by Ms Teede might be refused as a matter of the
discretion.
point at which an estoppel could arise has not been reached. Nevertheless, there
is a prospect that the determination of the judicial
review proceedings will
resolve some issues if not the entire unfair dismissal application.
and how any findings made in these proceedings will have an effect on the
judicial review proceedings is less clear. Arguably,
issue estoppel could arise
such that the Commission’s findings on an issue could prevent a party from
re-litigating the same
issue in judicial review proceedings, either by virtue of
s 34(4) of the Act or common law principles: see
Moylan v City of South Perth
[2006] WASC 262
so, neither the dismissal of the unfair dismissal proceedings, nor the upholding
of them, will resolve all of the issues in the
judicial review proceedings. A
finding that there was a dismissal for the purpose of s 29(1)(c) does not, of
itself, resolve the
question of whether the dismissal was valid at law: see [28]
above. Nor will a finding that there was procedural unfairness. A finding
unfair dismissal application that there was no denial of procedural fairness
will not resolve the question in the judicial
review proceedings as to whether
there was an absence of power to make the decision.
is a wide scope for the Commission to determine the unfair dismissal application
without making findings about whether there
was a denial of procedural fairness.
A denial of procedural fairness is but one factor in determining whether a
dismissal is harsh,
oppressive or unfair for the purpose of s 29(1)(c). The test
in the unfair dismissal application is ultimately whether the Shire
its right to dismiss as outlined by the Industrial Appeal Court in
The Undercliffe Nursing Home v The Federated
Miscellaneous Workers’ Union of Australia, Hospital, Service and
Miscellaneous
(1985) 65 WAIG 385
possibility of the unfair dismissal application finally resolving all issues in
the judicial review proceedings is more remote
than the prospect of the judicial
review proceedings resolving all issues in the unfair dismissal proceedings.
factor weighs heavily in favour of staying the unfair dismissal application. If
upheld, orders in the judicial review proceedings
could have a fundamental
effect on the unfair dismissal application, precluding the maintenance of the
claim entirely. Otherwise,
aspects of the unfair dismissal application may be
affected by issues determined by the judicial review proceedings.
Generally balancing the advantages and disadvantages to each
Shire argued that it would be disadvantaged by a stay of these proceedings,
(a) It remains party to, and exposed to, two sets of
proceedings with the prospect of having to litigate the same issues twice; and
(b) The course Ms Teede has taken has effectively deprived it of the ability
to oppose an extension of time to bring an unfair dismissal
first argument does not advance the Shire’s opposition to the stay
application. Ms Teede has commenced two sets of proceedings.
The grant or denial
of a stay will not alter the Shire’s position to its disadvantage in this
regard. Rather, a stay will alleviate
the disadvantage.
second argument is that if Ms Teede only intends to press the unfair dismissal
claim if her judicial review application fails,
then it should be made at that
time and not sooner. By not waiting to commence the unfair dismissal
application, Ms Teede has effectively
reversed the onus of proof which she would
have had, to establish that she ought to be given an extension of time to bring
dismissal proceedings. Further, she has denied the Shire the opportunity
to argue that an extension of time should not be granted,
including for reasons
that she is estopped by the determination of the judicial review proceedings
from doing so.
to this second argument, a stay will not deprive the Shire of the opportunity to
argue, after the judicial review proceedings are
determined, that an estoppel
arises, should Ms Teede continue to maintain these proceedings. And, even if
technically the Shire misses
an opportunity to oppose an extension of time, it
is difficult to envisage how Ms Teede would not discharge the onus on her of
a case for an extension in circumstances where unfair dismissal
proceedings had been foreshadowed as an alternative cause of action
to judicial
review proceedings at a time when the unfair dismissal claim was within time.
All that the course the Shire proposes
would achieve is an additional step in
the hypothetical later proceedings, namely, an out of time application.
again, a stay does not create this disadvantage. It is the current reality.
I am uncomfortable with the idea that a party should be penalised or criticised
for complying with the time limits set out
in the Act. The 28-day time limit for
commencing a referral of an unfair dismissal claim is designed, in part, to
limit prejudice
to respondents. The effect of bringing the claim within time is,
obviously, that Ms Teede avoids the need to establish a case for
an extension of
time by commencing the claim only if and after dismissal of judicial review
proceedings. But that is an incidental
consequence, rather than a
’forensic benefit’ as the Shire contends (ts 9).
with the Act should not be discouraged just because it incidentally advantages a
party or disadvantages another. Compliance
with the Act means that the
respondent is on notice of the claim. It limits prejudice to the respondent and
promotes the efficient
use of the Commission’s and the parties’
resources compared with what the Shire says ought to occur, namely, nothing
until judicial review proceedings are determined, and then an application for an
extension of time.
am not persuaded that disadvantage to the Shire is a reason not to grant a
the other hand, to refuse a stay will mean that the parties will both need to
commit resources to these proceedings, whilst also
prosecuting and defending the
judicial review proceedings. A stay is, in this respect, advantageous to
Which proceeding was commenced first
unfair dismissal application was commenced first. That might ordinarily indicate
that the unfair dismissal application should
be progressed and if any proceeding
is to be stayed it would be the subsequently commenced judicial review
proceedings. However,
tempering this is the fact that there is a relatively
short time limit for commencing proceedings for unfair dismissal of 28 days,
Ms Teede expressly foreshadowed in the unfair dismissal application that she
intended to commence judicial review proceedings,
and seek to stay the unfair
dismissal application.
Avoiding multiplicity of proceedings in
relation to similar issues
factor has overlapping considerations to those discussed above. This factor
favours the grant of a stay.
Whether work done might be
note that to date, three conciliation conferences have been convened in the
unfair dismissal application, but the application has
not otherwise been
significantly advanced. It is in its early stages. While the Shire has filed a
response and participated in conferences,
the proceedings have not reached a
stage where it can be said this factor weighs against the grant of a
The effects of duplicate proceedings becoming common
circumstances of Ms Teede’s termination are relatively unique in that she
was the CEO of a local government. The
Local Government Act 1995
contains provisions relevant to the engagement and termination of local
government CEOs:
. In these circumstances I do not consider that
there is a significant risk of it becoming a common practice to bring both
dismissal applications in the Commission concurrently with judicial
review proceedings.
The public interest
abuse of process issues the Shire raised are relevant to the public interest. As
discussed above, I am satisfied that a stay of
these proceedings would not be
against the public interest for the reasons the Shire argued.
aspect of the public interest is in ensuring the efficient use of the
Commission’s resources.
the judicial review proceedings might resolve the unfair dismissal application
in its entirety, or determine significant issues
that arise, a stay is likely to
ensure more efficient use of the Commission’s resources.
The undesirability of two courts competing to see which of them
determines common facts first
factor self-evidently favours one of the two proceedings being stayed.
Consideration of circumstances relating to witnesses
party has suggested that any consideration of the circumstances of witnesses is
relevant to the determination of this application.
advanced the proceedings are in each venue
was told that the judicial review proceedings have not progressed beyond the
filing of the application on 25 February 2025. These
proceedings are slightly
more advanced. However, this factor does not tip the balance either
Orders and Disposition
weighed the relevant factors, I am satisfied that it is appropriate to stay
these proceedings until the determination of the
judicial review proceedings. I
will order accordingly, with liberty to the parties to apply.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (162 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter